In the Name of God, the most Merciful and Compassionate is the key to the door of the treasury of the wise. 
The Name of God is the beginning of thought and the end of speech. Complete thy thought and speech in His Name. 
Existent before all creation, more eternal than all eternities, 
Ancient Lord of the eternal universe, Decorator of the neck of the Pen with a necklace, 
Revealer of the secrets of the mysterious heaven, secret Goal of those who know the divine mysteries, 
Source of every spring of liberality, Author of all existence, 
He adorns the mountain with rubies, giving verdure to the earth and a ripple to water. 
Guide to those who cultivate their souls, Source of light to those who partake of His daily bread, 
He strings the fine thread of intellect with pearls and is the sight of the blind eye of reason. 
He marks the brow of the saint. He crowns the kings of this world. 
Destroyer of well matured plans, He it is who accepts excuses for shortcoming. Protector of those who cry aloud in fear, Source of the counsel of the spiritually minded, 
Beginning and end of Existence and Attributes, Creator and Destroyer of creation, 
Compared with His Majesty which is greater than both worlds, our time from its beginning to its end is but an instant. 
Who but God in this eternal universe could say :  Whose is the Empire?  
He was, when all that is high and low was not; He will be, when all that exists has come to an end. 
Those who were nourished by eternal knowledge, have not solved this difficult problem. 
Oh, what an ocean is His eternal knowledge ! Oh, what a desert is His eternal kingdom ! 
His eternity has no beginning; neither has it any end. 
The celestial maidens in the garden of thy form come from Him; the light of the sight of thine eyes comes from Him. 
The struggle of every living being is to do service to His Godhead. 
His Existence alone has permanence; He is sanctified who is not transient. 
Gratitude is due to Him from the sun and the mountains for His thousand bounties to them. 
When His munificence was veiled by light, the thorn was far from the rose and the cane from sweetness. 
When by His liberality He created generosity, existence was freed from the bondage of non-existence. 
For the sake of these few ruined villages, the work of heaven was entangled. 
Until He had untied this knot which transcends the power of thought, the tresses of the night were not freed from the grasp of the day. 
When He scattered the pearls of the necklace of heaven, He combed the dust of night from the tresses of non-existence. 
He made seven knots on the girdle of the earth, when He made the spheres of heaven. 
He made a robe for the sun and a cloak for the moon from this white cloth of day and this black cloth of night. 
He loosened drops of rain from the heart of the sea; He drew the spring of life from the lips of heaven. 
He poured the wine of dawn into the dark clay; He poured a draught of that wine into the mouth of the stone. 
He made the lustre of the pearl and the richness of the ruby from the fire and water which He mingled together. 
He placed the blood of the heart of the earth, shed on account of the severity of the wind, in the heart of the red ruby. 
He made the garden of generosity as beautiful as the sky; He made the fame of the nightingale of speech reach to heaven. 
He gave sweet dates to the palm tree of speech; He gave the oyster shell of the ear to the pearl of speech. 
He veiled sleep. He clothed the water with the garment of life. 
He spread the tresses of the earth on the shoulders of the world. He painted the mole of sin upon the face of Adam.  
He cleansed dishonour from the face of gold. He washed the blood from the rose with the spring cloud. 
He lightened the darkness of the skies by the stars. He entrusted the soul of the morning breeze to sweet herbs. 
He placed the blood of the world in the heart of the clay. He placed the pulse of wisdom in the beat of the heart. 
He set laughter on the lips to destroy grief. He seated Venus at the banquet of night’s minstrelsy. 
The perfume of the night is diffused by His musk-sellers. The new moon wears the ring of His servitude. 
A stone thrown from His royal tent broke the head of soaring eloquence. 
Halting imagination travelled far and wide and returned from His door empty-handed. 
The mind travelled far but did not find Him ; the eye searched far and wide but found none like Him. 
Reason entered, saying :  I have sought Him. This was presumption; I chastised it. 
Those drawn by the point of His compass join us in our search of Him. 
The birds on the Tree of Paradise soar towards Him; those who walk in heaven knock also at the same door. 
As for heaven, it wears the collar of His servitude, and as for the heart of the earth, it is full of love of Him. 
Unity lives by His omnipotent name; eternity is the pillar of the throne of His empire.The sighs of the weary are His favoured guests; His swift messengers are the feet of captives. 
The heart which is purer than the soul, lays claim to being the dust of His threshold. 
Compared with a rose of the garden, grown from the seed on the dust of His threshold, Eram is but an idle tale. 
The dust of Nezami which exists by His aid, is soil for the seed of His unity.  On punishment and the wrath of God 
Oh God! Erom Thee all existence has sprung; through Thee the impotent dust is strong. 
Creation rests under Thy banner ; we live through Thee, as Thou livest by Thine own Essence. 
Thy Being has neither form nor body; Thou resembles! none, and none resembles Thee. 
Thou art unchangeable, and Thou didst not and wilt not die. 
We are all transient; eternity belongs to Thee alone. The high and sacred empire is Thine. 
The earth is fixed by Thy command. Thou makest the azure vault without pillars. 
Who but Thee gave the curve of the polo-stick to heaven? Who but Thee gave to the cauldron of the body the salt of life? 
When Thy eternity calls on the chequer-board of night and day, who but Thee can say : I am the Lord? 
Love could no longer endure the attraction of Thy name, if peace came not from Thee.
When Thy generosity took the road of the world, the earth bore a heavy load. 
The world would have been ruptured, if it had not been born from the loins of Thy munificence. 
The necklace of devotion is threaded by Thee; worship save of Thee is unlawful. 
May he be silent who does not speak of Thee; may all be forgotten which is not in remembrance of Thee. 
The cup-bearer of the night begs for Thy cup; the bird of dawn prays to Thy name. 
Draw back the curtain and come out alone; even if I were that veil, rend it. 
Show heaven its impotence; loosen the knots of the earth. 
Erase the signs of the universe ; change the forms of matter. 
Give back the speech of the tongue to the Pen; discharge the debt of the earth to non-existence. 
Delay the progress of tyrants; remove selfish desires from the seekers of jewels. 
Break asunder this universe of six dimensions; pull down the nine-tiered pulpit of heaven. 
Throw down the casket of the moon upon the terrestrial globe; throw the stone of Saturn at the cup of Venus. 
Scatter this necklace which illuminates the night; break the wings of the bird of night and day. 
Scrape this layer of clay off the earth, and say to this brick of the earth :  Cease to be. 
Wipe the dust of night from the brow of the universe; say to Jupiter: Fall, and to Leo: Do not rise.
How long wilt Thou allow this new scheme of the universe to continue? Bring back a veil of the old order. 
Destroy the scheme and free the neck of heaven from the chain of motion and immobility. 
Pour water upon the fire of injustice; lower pride to the dust. 
Burn the tables of the astronomers; close the eyes of the Sun-worshippers. 
Deprive this constellation of the orb of the moon; draw back this curtain from these speculations, 
So that they may testify to Thy divinity and confess their own non-existence.  The birds gird their loins, saying : We are Thy slaves roses are filled with life, saying:  We live by Thee.’’ 
There is no blood money for him whom Thou killest, and there is no fine for whomsoever Thou hangest. 
Thou makest the stage of the journey by night to be long; Thou bringest back the sun which has gone down.  Although Thou mayest be angry with many, none can complain. 
Thou hast given the light of reason to the soul; Thou hast imparted the savour of the heart to the tongue. 
From Thee heaven received its motion, the fixed star its immobility. The garden of existence received the water of life from Thee. 
The airs and graces of the wild rose come not from the morning breeze, but from the dust of Thy feet, its collyrium. 
The calyx of the lily. Thy cup, has tongue only for Thy praise. Nezami, the slave, who sings the song of Thy unity, is in both worlds the dust of Thy road. 
Make his mind prosperous by the knowledge of Thee; free his neck from the snare of sorrow. 
Oh God ! Thou was from the beginning when we were not; Thou wilt live eternally and we shall perish. 
The universe obeys Thine order; the shoulder of heaven carries Thy saddle cloth. 
We are the homeless beggars at Thy door; we have the ring of Thy servitude in our ears. 
We bear Thy brand, and kings do not accept the branded dog for the chase. 
Thou wilt accept us, because we are from Thy garden. We are the dove which wears the collar of Thy servitude and the dog which bears Thy brand.
We do not expect aid from any helper; we have no other support but Thee.
All these hopes and fears are for Thy sake; therefore forgive us, oh generous One. 
Help us, because we have no helper. If Thou dost drive us away, to whom shall we turn ? 
What is this tongue, and what is this speech? Speech and silence are both to be regretted. 
What an immensity between my insignificance and the praise of God’s glory ! 
How dared this soul traverse this sea? How dared this heart drink from this spring? 
We are helpless as those who are dumb, therefore we repeat :  He who knows God.  
Since I am ashamed of my useless speech, forgive me by Thy bounty. 
Although we come before Thee in our destitution, yet we come hoping in Thee, oh God! 
Befriend us, oh Helper of the sorrowful! Help us, oh Helper of the helpless! 
The caravan has passed, see how far we lag behind. Oh Thou, our Helper, look on our helplessness I 
With whom shall we take refuge? Thou art without equal. To whom shall we fly? Thou art our Helper. 
We will not make a shrine except of Thy door; who will cherish us, if Thou wilt not? 
Who begs as we do? Who laments more than w'e? 
Forgive our sins, because we pray to Thee ; help us, because we take refuge in Thee. 
Oh God, Nezami’s name is honoured in Thee; his greatness comes from serving Thee. 
Send the blessing of praise to his tongue; give his soul knowledge of Thee.  In praise of the Holy Prophet, the prayers of God be upon him and upon his family 
When Alef was drawn on the First Tablet, 
it was fixed as a beading to the door of Ahmad. 
When Alef gave the empire to the ring of Ha, it gave that same Ha, a collar from Dal and a belt from Mim, 
Therefore it received from Mim and Dal the circle of the empire and the line of perfection.
Under this dome of turquoise bricks, there grew a fresh tangerine tree from the garden of Paradise.
It is the nature of a tangerine tree that in the world it should first bring forth fruit and then blossom. 
When  I was a Prophet  carried the banner forward, it entrusted the completion of prophetship to Mohammad. The moon is the bezel of emerald; its gem is the seal of Mohammad.
The ear of the world carries the Mim of Ins bondage; the two worlds themselves submit to him. 
He is the great Surveyor, and the Anointed is his slave; they are both called messengers of good tidings. 
He is illiterate, but speaks with eloquence from the Alef of Adam to the Mim of the Messiah. 
He is straight like Alef in his promise and fidelity. He is the beginning and the end of the prophets. 
He is the most brilliant centre of the compass of Be thou, the centre of the all inclusive circle of speech. 
The whole world of literature is but an empty sound compared with his speech, and the heavens are a girdle for his waist. 
Although he has no pride, yet he did not bow down to the world. 
The veiled ones of heaven are the doorkeepers of his sanctuary. Chastity itself is nurtured by him, 
His dust cleanses sin from the eyes. His departure wrests revenue from Mecca. 
His silence is heart-ravishing speech; his friendship is a virtue which destroys faults. To quell the disturbance by him is the heart’s delight, also there can be no escape from the madness of his love. 
He was the leader of all and the beginning of all good. He was the great fixed star, but moved swiftly. 
In his heart the divine candle was lit; he learnt the lesson of eternity from the beginning to the end. 
The source of the sun, dependent on him, is but half the crescent moon of the night of his Ascent to Heaven. 
He was the crowned monarch of the Night of Ascension; he enthroned kings with belts and crowns. 
He gave ease to weary breath; he shod the heavenly steed which carried him by night. 
The riders of speech stood motionless ready with their steeds, expecting his return.
When the chequered steed ceased to gallop, Nezami was appointed as its groom.
One midnight when the sun set the world-illuminating torch in motion,
The eyes of the nine heavens were his retinue ; Venus and the moon carried his torch. 
He left the seven spheres, the four quarters, and the six dimensions in the secret chamber of creation. 
Hay bade farewell to his footsteps; night was in ecstasy at his advent. 
The eyes of the strangers were heavy with sleep, when he turned quickly away from sleep. 
With the cage of the body, the bird of his heart flew away from this prison to its own resting-place. 
The birds, namely, the angels, remained behind helpless. Heaven threw down its cloak.
His body was lighter than the heart; his divine bird flew with the cage. 
As he moved on step by step, he was seized and carried further and further towards divine bliss. 
Since both worlds had their eyes on him, they bowed their heads adoring him. 
His feet carried him hundreds of stages as one stage, because he had the highest honour. 
His exalted steed threw down its saddle-cloth upon the shoulder of all existence. 
The sea of the earth became a mine and he its pearl. The heaven bore him as its crown. 
Taurus took the jewels of that dark perfumed night from the Bull of the earth. 
He took the crown from Cancer and the belt from Orion as gifts for that journey. 
The Virgo which received fresh hyacinth from him, threw the cluster at Leo. 
Venus, who weighs the night, held Libra in her hand to estimate the honour of his night. 
Libra bowed down to the glory of that night, because she had not weights enough in her scales to weigh its dignity. 
His healing breath poured balm on the tail of this Scorpion of the azure realm. 
When he hit the target with the arrow from the bow, the poison left the kid which was on his table. 
He became Joseph of the bucket like the sun; he became Jonah of the fish like the Water bucket.  
When he set the throne of the Pleiades on the sign Aries, the army of flowers pitched its tents on the plain.
The pleasure house of the earth was decked with the colours of spring by the rose of that exalted garden of Paradise. 
lie recited the ten verses of courtesy from the Koran ; he asked pardon of the prophets for his approach. 
His footsteps rent the curtain of the stars. The shoulders of the angels bore his banner. 
Midnight was filled with the musk of his lips. The crescent moon was the shoe cast by his steed. 
The canter of Boraq was like lightning in the dark night of that event. 
Like a partridge, the falcon flew dove-like with the glory of the Phoenix.
The Tree of Paradise touched the front of his robe. High heaven laid hands on his skirt. 
The night turned into day; lo, what a wonderful day ! The rose turned into cypress ; lo, what a wonderful spring! 
Amongst all the roses and narcissi of that garden, his narcissus had the collyrium which takes away false vision. 
He was passed on like a rose from hand to hand up this turquoise-carpeted stair, till he reached the foot of the Throne. 
His fellow travellers threw down their shields; they broke their pinions and shed their feathers. 
He in amazement, like the strangers on the road, knocked at the door of that Threshold. The veiled angels, His doorkeepers, with one accord helped him down from his litter. 
He went on that road which must be travelled alone; one foot knew not where the other would tread. 
All but him remained on the Threshold of that Mystery; even he lost consciousness of himself. 
His foot was the crown of existence ; the heavens had need of that provender. 
When he drew his pen through all words, he raised his banner above the heavens. 
The lord of life urged the body along the road, so long as his physical body drew the breath of life. 
When the journey to heaven ended, the heart and the soul were charged with their own work. 
The body hastened to the place of its origin. Vision became such that imagination could not follow it. 
The eyes which are fit to look upon the Eternal Light will not lower themselves to vain thoughts. 
The road of Eternity was before his feet. The curtain of physical creation was withdrawn. 
When he travelled the endless road, he raised his head above the veil of nature. 
His high spirits reached a stage beyond time and space through the great enlightenment of his heart. 
Jealousy laid hold on him from behind that curtain; at the same time bewilderment held him back. 
The hand of Union drew back the curtain from the glorious door of the house of Beauty. 
His feet transferred their function to his head. His soul gazed on that Vision. 
He traveled without the labour of his feet; he sprang, but was not allowed a resting place.  
As words leave the lips, so he departed from himself; therefore his greeting was accepted.
He saw the sign of that Light which knows no decline, with eyes which were beyond imagination. 
The vision of Him is free from accident and matter, because He is beyond accident and matter. 
He saw God as the Absolute, and this is acceptable ; God can be seen. 
One must not deny that he saw with his eyes; whoso does not admit his vision is blind. 
The Prophet saw Him, not with a. different eye, but with this physical eye. 
The vision of that curtain was not spacial; the journey on that road was timeless. 
Whoso was permitted to see behind that curtain, went on the way which is not a road. 
He is, but not in any place ; He who is bound by space is not God. 
Do not deny His permanence; it is blasphemy. Do not limit Him to space; it is ignorance. 
He drank the wine which God had prepared ; he poured a draught of that wine into our clay. 
Eternal Grace was the companion of his soul. Divine Compassion was the cherisher; he was the cherished. 
His lips were adorned with a sweet smile; he asked favours for his people. 
His spirit was enriched by that Treasure; all his aims were realised. 
He was strengthened by that Audience; he faced the toils of this world.
He returned from that journey which demands love. He went and came back in an instant of time. 
Oh thou, whose word is a seal on our tongue! Thy scent is the elixir of our life. 
Complete the cycle of generosity ; entrust the completion of speech to Nezami.  The first eulogy (to the Prophet) 
The canopy of the nine thrones of the seven stars, the end and the ornament of the prophets, 
Ahmad, the Prophet, the dust of whose feet is wisdom, has both worlds tied to his saddle strap. 
Fairest hyacinth in the garden of glory, most precious jewel of the sea of mystery, 
His tresses are Virgo which shines by day; his essence gives brightness to the sun. 
His sweet lips did not laugh aloud, that his pearls may not destroy the lustre of the shell. 
Why did the stone break his pearl, since his essence did not wound even the stony hearts? 
The stone of his accuser broke a pearl in his casket. 
The pearl was freed from the narrow casket; it is not strange that stones should produce gems. 
Av, because the heard was of the stone, it had the dryness of melancholia. 
How could this stone rejoice, if it were not a breaker of pearls and a grinder of rubies? 
Had the stone enough silver to pay compensation, that it came and wounded that small mouth?The gems, produced from stones, are all compensation for his wounded lip. 
How could the gem, mined from the earth, compensate for the pearl of his tooth? 
In compensation for his tooth, victory obeyed him with the utmost effort and sincerity. 
When he rinsed his mouth with the bloody water of the stone, he rightly took the name Munificence. 
He took hold of the tooth and gave it gladly as a, thanksgiving and surrendered it. 
He had no desire of possession, because in both worlds he needed nothing. 
In the ranks of his army on the field of battle, his hand was the standard and his tongue the dagger. 
His dagger sacrificed the tooth; a dagger like a saw is useless. 
What w T as the purpose of these troubles? That mankind might gaze upon his generosity and leave the thorn and take the fruit from his flower. 
The garden is full of roses ; why speak of thorns? The string is threaded with beads; why speak of the tail of the serpent? 
Abandon the crow for the tail of the peacock; remain in the garden with the song of the nightingale. 
The poetic talent of Nezami, which through him is like a rose, is a sweetly melodious nightingale on his rose.  The second eulogy (to the Prophet) 
Thou, whose body is purer than the pure soul! Thy soul is nourished by May my soul be sacrificed to thee.
Thou art the centre of the circle of mercy; thou art the destroyer of the dot of zahmat. 
Thou art the moon of the Arabian travellers; thou art the king of the kings of Iran. 
They seek the path by thee, and thou dost not guide. Thou art thyself the lord of the village; yet thou art not in the village. 
When the great like thee go on a journey, they do not themselves alone consume the provision for all. 
What hast thou brought back for us from that table at which thou hast partaken of fresh dates? 
Open thy mouth, that all may partake of sweetmeats and take fresh dates from the water of thy mouth.
Oh thou, whose dark tresses are the day of salvation, the fire of the love of thee is the water of life. 
Reason is distracted for love of thy face; thy tresses are the chains of the maniacs. 
The heavens are a slave to thy girdle. The dawn, compared with the sun of thy face, is but a smile. 
The impure were cleansed of vice by thee. The navel of the earth obtained its musk-bladder from thee.
That land is loaded with musk by thy musk-scented dust.
Thy dust is better than the wind of Solomon ; how should I compare it with paradise? It is better than the Guardian Angel of paradise. 
The Ka’beh, the altar of thy devotions, thirsts for a draught of the rose water of thine elixir. 
The world holds thy crown and thy throne; thy throne is the earth, and thy crown is the heavens. 
Thou, who art the light of the great, hast no shadow; thou art thyself the shadow of the light of God.  
The four standards are the pillars of Islam; the five prayers are the insignia of empire.
The dust of the abject has become a garden through thee. The eyes of strangers have their sight from thee. 
Since thy foot has trodden in the dark night upon the crown of the revolving heaven, 
Thou hast filled its lap with gold and pearls and made the buttons of its robe of small gold bricks. 
In the oyster shell of the dawn, the morning breeze mixes the ambergris of thy perfume with the hands of purity, 
Therefore the army of ambergris lowered its standard wherever the morning breezes blew.
If thou gave the perfume which thy ringlets diffuse for the price of the two worlds, thou wouldst give it cheaply. 
The Tree of Heaven is a ribbon decorating thy robe; the heavenly Throne is an usher in thy court. 
When the light of thy soul shines in the morning, that Throne will be but a mote in that sunshine. 
If from the Dawn of Eternity a mirror had not reflected thy light, how could thy light have fallen, upon the dust of the earth? 
Oh thou, who art both worlds, why art thou under the earth ? Thou art not an earthly treasure ; why art thou bound to the dust? 
It is necessary to entrust the treasure to the dust, so long as thou art in the dust, oh pure treasure. 
Thy poverty is a ruin sufficient for thy treasure. Thy shadow is a moth sufficient for thy candle. 
The curved heaven is the target of thy prayers, the wheel of its Aquarius is the rope of thy well. 
These two revolving black and white attendants are messengers on the road amongst thy train. 
Reason seeks a cure ; thou art its physician. The moon is the traveller; thou art her object of wonder.
Arise, turn the night of the expectant into day, and light the poetic mind of Nezami with joy.  
Thou, who wearest a veil from Medina and one from Mecca, how much longer shall the sun be behind a cloud? 
If thou art a moon, show us a little of thy light; and if thou art a rose lend us perfume from thy garden.
Those who expect thee are dying of expectation. We are crying out against thee, oh help us. 
Come to Iran, do not stay in Arabia ; thou hast the light and dark steeds of night and day. 
Adorn the Empire and refresh the world. Fill both worlds with thy voice. Strike the die thyself, that the amirs may not strike it; read the proclamation thyself, that the proclaimed may be silenced. 
The dust of thy feet gave a perfume to the faith ; the wind of discord arose and blew away that perfume.  Withdraw authority from those who live at ease. Cleanse this pulpit from the impure.
They live in the house of demons, drive them out; throw them into the granary of non-existence.
Give them less provender, because they are gluttons; make the provender thine own, because they are plunderers.We are all body, come thou and be our soul; we are all ants, be thou our Solomon.
On one side they make a breach in the faith, and on the other they lie in ambush. 
Thou art the leader, why is the caravan alone? Thou holdest the centre, why is the standard elsewhere? 
Either send an Ali into the ranks.of the battle; or send an Omar on to the road of Satan. 
Throw darkness upon the moon of Yaman. Raise thy head like a moon from the silk brocade. 
Be the helper of the captives; destroy the hypocrites. 
It is enough to sleep for live hundred and seventy years; the sun is high, hasten to the assembly. 
Arise and order the Angel of Death to blow out these few candles. 
Be the secret behind the curtain of mystery. We are all asleep, be thou awake. 
Stretch out thy hand and help us all against the calamities of this transitory house. 
Nothing that is thy pleasure is aught but good; none can hold thee responsible for thine actions. 
If thou lookest favourably upon us, thou wilt suffice for all our needs. 
Describe a circle with thy finger, so that whatever exists may be bestowed upon thee. 
Who can intercede with thee on the day of judgment for forgiveness for a handful of dust? 
If thou drawest back the veil, both worlds will come to ecstasy.
The brain of Nezami which seeks knowledge of thee, lives by the ambergris of thy perfume. 
By. his prayers, bestow a perfume of fidelity upon him. Give to a beggar an empire like that of Pereidun. 
The fourth eulogy (to the Prophet) 
Oh thou, the jewel of the crown of the prophets, giving crowns to kings, 
All in this house, whoever they are, whether strangers or those of thy retinue, are dependent upon thee. 
Although the first couplet was dedicated to thy name ; yet for the sake of the rhyme thy name stood at the end. 
When the ordinance was made, this ruined world prospered through thee and through Adam. 
The material of which the house is built, is first water and then brick. 
Thou art Adam, and thou art Noah; nay, thou art better than both. Thou dost untie the one knot of them both. 
Tor Adam, who was defiled by that grain, repentance was a wholesome conserve of roses. 
In his garden, heartfelt repentance is thy perfume ; his conserve of roses is the dust of thy street. 
When the heart partook of the sweet conserve of repentance from thee, the conserve of roses lost its sweetness. 
They made the ball of acceptance in eternity and threw it into the ranks on the plain of the heart. 
Unskilful Adam came forward to strike that ball with his own polo-stick,  
But when his polo-pony strayed after ears of corn, the ball remained behind, and he left the field.
Noah, who reached the water of life parched with thirst, mistook the flood-water for the spring. 
When the turn of the child, Abraham, came, he went half-way and fell several times. 
Since the heart of David panted, his melody was fitting for this tenor and bass. 
Solomon, being stained with worldly empire, kept within the bounds of respect and did not seek this crown. 
Joseph did not taste that water; he saw no sign but the rope and the bucket. 
Khezr turned back from this arid journey and found that his skirt was wet with the water of that spring. 
Moses saw his hands empty of this bowl; he broke the glass on the rock of Show me. 
Messiah did not intend to carry off this grain, because he was one of those accused in the house. 
Thou alone, like heaven, didst discard all and threwest thy shadow over this work. 
This book was sealed with thy name, and this proclamation came to an end with thine advent. 
Arise and ordain a better scheme than that of the revolving heaven. The heavens are idle; work thou. 
The horizon is the boundary of thy polo-ground ; the ball of the earth is in the curve of thy polo-stick. 
Until the dust of non-existence rises from annihilation, gallop and urge on thy steed, because the ground is thine.
What is annihilation that it should take the water from thy bowl, or base non-existence that it should call on thy name? 
Bring non-existence to naught, annihilate annihilation. 
Thou, whose revelation is the speech of the speechless and balm for the affliction of the brokenhearted.
Reason guided the ship of the soul through the sea of blood to the shore by thy laws. 
Thy threshold is the shrine of the nine heavens. The anemone of the six days of creation hangs in thy tresses. 
The empire will be entangled like thy locks, if one hair falls from thy head. 
Thou readest what is not written on parchment; without words thou knowest the inmost thoughts of the mind. 
Thy fingers wrote not, so that thy words may not be censured. 
The words of all men are subject to spoiling fingers; thy words are safe from the finger of any man. 
The dust of thy threshold is a sweet loaf; thy sweet lips are pistachio-nuts and jujube-fruits. 
In the desert of love, one morsel of thy sweet loaf is ample provision for the forty days’ journey of love. 
Thou art the fairest morning of my salvation. I am the dust of thy feet, because thou art my water of life. 
Thy dust is itself the garden of my soul. Thy garden is my soul and my world.  I put thy dust in the eyes of Nezami. I carry thy saddle-cloth on the shoulder of my servitude. 
I rise like the breeze and settle like dust on that garden which is pure as the soul, 
So that, when the elect anoint themselves with pure ambergris, they should make my dust the ambergris for their head.
I who in this circle which goes round the world am tied to the city like the centre of a point, 
Have no opportunity to stretch my limbs in comfort. I have the shadow but not the glory of the Phoenix.
My foot is sunk deep in this mire; my hand is on the saddle-strap of heaven. 
I lowered the crown of my head to beneath my feet, and I made a footstep of my knee-cap. 
The mirror of my heart on my knee-cap has become the great brightness of my face. 
I who occupied myself with this mirror, looked through the mirror of my physical eye 
To see from which mirror light may come, or from which fire water may reach me. 
When the eye of reason with just judgment quickly searched the world, 
It saw, of that essence which is in the spirit, one w T ho is the benefactor of the noble-minded, 
The mighty king whose fortune is victorious, the rose tree of this turquoise-coloured garden,  
A Khezr with the dignity of Alexander, of just judgment, the fixed star which determines the astronomical tables and explains the Almagest,
He who is first in the purpose of existence, and for whose sake the Verse of Purpose was revealed, 
I he crowned king, owner of Solomon’s signet ring, the pride of the world, King Fakhrod-Din. 
His descent from David makes the name of Solomon befit his dignity. 
Through him the banner of Isaac is raised aloft. If he has an enemy, it is a,n Esma’ili. 
He is single-hearted; he holds the six dimensions and the seven spheres; Bahrain Shah is the centre of the nine circles. 
It is he who, because of his valour in the trial of strength, assigns a grave as a portion to Bahram-e Gur. 
King of kings in his great ability, famous in the world for his great wisdom, 
He sits on the throne of the Sultan and the Caliph and is the conqueror of Mesopotamia and the Abkhaz. 
More learned and just than all living, most beloved and noblest of the munificent, 
His religion is the heaven and his kingdom the stars. His country is the oyster shell; the dust of his threshold is the pearl. 
He is the spring and the sea full of fish and of pearls, a peaceful spring and a full sea. 
The sun escapes like quicksilver because of his generous hand. 
The brilliant pure ruby on his belt laughs at the ruby on the belt of the sun.
The calamity of this window of lapis lazuli struck him who laid hands on him.
His bell deafens the ears of heaven; his breath breaks the mirror of the moon. 
A better beginning than happiness, a better end than the milk of human kindness, 
May his hand, which is the cup-bearer of the bowl of generosity, last for ever, because the bowl is everlasting.
Oh thou, who art the glory of the essence of mankind, the sight of the eye of the world, 
The heaven which gives thee continual victory, is pregnant in its nine wombs with one secret of thine. 
The ears of the two fish above and beneath thee are the shell for the pearl of thy sword. 
The moon which draws its sword by night, has thrown down its shield before thy sword. 
The brightness of thy sword, which is like the waters of the Euphrates, has broken the jar of the water of life. 
He who sleeps during thy deluge, would be carried away by the flood, even if he were like Noah. 
Thy bowl gives understanding like that of Kei- kbosrou and Jamshid. Thy fane burns the moth of the sun. 
Be lion-hearted; thou conquerest the brave. I said lion in error; thou conquerest lions. 
Heaven fears thee more than it fears the lions of this thicket.  
Who on the field of battle would have such a high heart and such daring as to boast to thee of valour and courage? 
Thy hand of desire is absolute over all that exists under the blue sky. 
Thou hast given office to many, but the angels alone gave thee office. 
Fortune chose thee to be the end of time. The Wind wrote Solomon on thy dust. 
God who gave thee youth and empire, gave thee the empire; do with it what thou wilt. 
Dust becomes gold by thy acceptance; poison becomes sugar by thy remembrance. 
If Fereidun does not drink wine with thee, the snakes of Zahhak will grow on his shoulders. 
Drink wine; thou hast a minstrel and a cup-bearer. Why grieve? Thou hast the eternal kingdom. 
Thou art the protector of the empire and the refuge of kings; thou ownest the sword and the crown. 
Though with the awe-inspiring sword thou tookest the crown and the throne, 
Thou scatterest treasure like the Caliphs; thou givest crowns and takest away thrones. 
The point of thy sword is over the crown. Why shouldst thou not take tribute from the kings? 
That head on which thy foot rests, takes a throne. How fortunate is that heart in which thou hast a place. 
The owl in thy era gives good fortune like the Phoenix. The head which reaches thy presence is lowered to the ground.
The notorious reprobate is guided. Because of thee, complaint has come to complain.
Under the hoof of thy steed, which is the pillar of the earth, thy enemy is nailed to the ground like a horseshoe. 
The seven heavens are a casket for thy jewel; the eight paradises are a pennon on thy standard.
He who does not obey thy order, finds the crown on his head turn to a halter. 
Thou art the master of all and every art. Thou art the soul of both worlds in one body. 
Punish generosity; kindle the candle of speech. 
Bestow the exalted robe of honour on servitude ; grant the hope of acceptance to Nezami. 
Though speech is nourishing and life-giving, it is lean wdien it reaches thy table. 
This sea and this mine are without pearls and rubies; give them pearls from the hand and rubies from the lips, 
And to him who is envious, give ungrudgingly rubies from the arrow and pearls from the sword. 
Since heaven gave thee a happy omen, may the conclusion of thy work be acceptable. 
On thy road are those who are prosperous and those who are destroyed. Prosperity is mine ; destruction is the lot of thine enemy. 
Thy victory has raised its head like a banner, and thy foe has lowered his head like a pen.  On the honour and dignity of this book 
I who am the singer of this new rose, am the melodious nightingale of thy garden.
I live on the road of thy love; I ring a bell down thy street. 
I have not accepted a loan from any man; I have spoken what my heart has bidden me to say. 
I have created a new magic; I have made a figure from a new mould. 
For a while I studied the sciences of polite learning; I embroidered the magic curtain of the dawn. 
It holds the capital of poverty and of kingship; it holds the Treasury of the Divine Mysteries. 
No fly has tainted its sugar; neither has its fly contaminated the sugar of any man. 
Noah throws down his shield, when he reaches this sea; Khezr breaks his pitcher at this spring. 
I put up this beauty to be raffled for by all the kings; thy name was the fortunate winner. 
Two books came from two famous places; each was dedicated to a Bahrain Shah. 
One has minted gold from the old mine, and the other has produced pearls from the new sea. 
One has raised its banner in Ghaznin, and the other has struck the Roman die on its coin. 
Although the words on that coin are like gold, my golden coin is better still. 
Though my baggage is less than his; yet I have a better customer. 
The style is wonderful, accept it. It w ill not be strange, if thou shouldst favour it, 
Because these words which are set in a better order than the design of a garden, are not lit by external means like a lamp.  
In this world, it is more prosperous than the world itself, newer than the heaven, yet born before it.
It takes no colour from any existing sign; it does not fit any existing tongue. 
None has touched the provender of speech at thy table; partake thou of it. 
If it is savoury, partake of it; may it nourish thee; if not, mayest thou forget it. 
On the night when thou sittest at the table of heaven, throw down a bone to me, 
Because, indeed, I boast that I am thy dog; I am proud to be thy slave. 
Out of all the kings who have shown me fidelity, I have desired to attach myself to thee. 
My service will at last lead to some recognition, and the end of this cord will reach its place. 
Though the eulogists have prostrated themselves at this enduring threshold, 
They stajid respectfully before Nezami; he is different; who are these others ? 
I who have remained in this, their stage, have travelled on a stage beyond them. 
I made my sword from the diamond of my  tongue; I beheaded all who followed me. 
The sword of Nezami which strikes off heads, is not blunted, though it is old. 
Though this dignity itself is unrivalled; yet my foot aspires to a still higher position. 
The pinnacle is high ; I soar above it, maybe that I shall prosper by my high spirit, 
So that, perchance, by the light of thy judgment, I may place my head where thy foot rests.
I follow thee, that I may reach to heaven. If thou bearest me not, how shall I reach it? 
It wag my intention during these last months to renew the covenant of my prostration before the king. 
Though in this circle which they have drawn, they have closed the road of my exit, 
I desired so eagerly to come before thee to receive increase of favours, that my body could not contain my soul, 
But when I looked again, there were lions all the way ; before and behind me were daggers and swords ;
Yet in this place which is encircled by swords, I read the Khotbeh to thee with a loud voice. 
I have sprinkled thy threshold with the water of speech; I am the pebble which has remained in its place. 
Oh sun, I am like a mote before thee; may my morning prayers be answered ! 
My heart has become a sea pouring out pearls to thee; the jewel of my soul has become the ornament on thy girdle. 
So long as night and day exist, may thy nights be days; may the jewel of thy kingship illuminate the night. 
May this house of thine be auspicious, and may that house of thine be yet more auspicious.
The first movement of the Pen produced the first letter of the Word. 
When they drew back the curtain of nonexistence, the first manifestation was the Word.Until the voice of the Heart spoke, the soul did not submit its free self to the clay.
When the Pen began to move, it opened the eyes of the world by means of the Word. 
Without speech the world has no voice; much has been spoken, but the Word has not diminished. 
In the language of love, speech is our soul. We are speech; these ruins are our palaces. 
The line of every thought which is written, is bound to the wings of the birds of speech. 
In this ever-changing old world, there is no subtlety finer than speech. 
The beginning of thought and the final reckoning is speech; remember this word. 
Kings have thought it worthy of a crown, and others have called it by other names. 
At times the voice of speech is raised by banners ; at other times it is written with the pen. 
It wins more victories than banners, and it conquers more empires than the pen. 
Though speech does not show its beauty to the worshippers of imagination, 
We who have looked upon speech, are its lovers, and by it we live. 
The laggards were warmed by its fire ; the eager travellers drew water from it. 
In this world it is more prosperous than the world itself, newer than heaven, yet born before it. 
It takes no colour from any existing sign; it does not fit any existing tongue.To such a degree that where the Word raises its banner, language and voice are both silent. 
If the Word had not woven the thread of the soul, how could the soul have been strung on this thread? 
They gain the empire of nature by speech; they make the seal of the laws with speech.
The mine had our words and its own gold; it took both to one who understands speech, 
Saying :  Tell me, which is better, the new speech, or the old gold?  He answered :  The new speech. 
The messenger of speech travels on his head; none succeeds as speech succeeds. 
Strike the die on the silver of speech whose dust is coins. Gold is worthless; it is the gazelle tied to the saddle strap of speech. 
Speech holds a higher place than any man. The wealth of this empire belongs to speech alone. 
None but the Heart understand the Word; the explanation of the Word is beyond speech. 
So long as the Word exists, may its fame continue ; may the name of Nezami be kept fresh by his words. 
Since ordinary unrhymed speech is as a gem to the jewellers, 
Bemember this subtle point, see what a weighed subtlety would be when it is measured. 
Poets who raise their voices, gain the treasure of both worlds by their poetry, 
Especially as The key of the treasury lies under the tongue of the poet.He who made the balance of speech, educated the fortunate ones by his words. 
The poets are the nightingales of heaven; how do they resemble others? 
When they are disturbed by the fire of thought, they are of the family of the angels. 
Poetry, the curtain of mystery, is a shadow of the prophetic veil. 
Two ranks stand before God; in front are the prophets, and the poets are behind. 
These two visions gaze upon the same Friend. These two are the kernel; all others are the shell. 
Every date from this table is not speech; it is life itself; 
It is a soul created by the clay beak, a thought ground in the mill of the heart. 
Poetry, the fount of knowledge, is dishonoured by base poets for a mere loaf. 
He who sings on this note, is in a better world than this. 
The saint who conquers the world by meditation, will not lower his head at every threshold. 
When he makes his knee-cap the feet of his heart, he embraces both worlds. 
The crown of his head comes down to greet his feet; he brings his feet and head together in a circle. 
In the curve of that circle, he is quickened; he destroys life and recreates it. 
At times, from that circle of meditation, he pierces the ear of heaven with a thousand rings of servitude;  
At other times, by means of this turquoise- coloured juggler’s cup, he bringB out ten beads where there is only one. 
When the steed of his eloquence is heated by words, life itself comes out to kiss his lips. 
To dig out the ruby from the mine, he penetrates the seven spheres of heaven. 
He assigns the child, his flowing poetry, to his poetic talent, the father. 
The curved heaven comes forth to serve him; he will be safe from the calamity of serving others. 
His prayers will bring comfort to mankind; his words will be a seal on their tongues. 
Whoso paints this picture, attach thyself to his words, because he is a poet. 
I would call h im the Jupiter of the magic word and deem him to be the Venus who caused the downfall of Harut. 
This baggage train which was captured by warrior knights, was debased by mean poets. 
It has dazed my judgment to know that poets have dishonoured poetry. 
How can the fruit of the heart, which is worth life itself, be like water to be exchanged for a loaf? 
Oh heaven, since these knots which they have tied on their belts, are beyond the reach of thy hands, 
The work is beyond thy reach; untie these knots in the cord of speech with thy toe. 
I The beggars who die for the love of gold, have destroyed the value of this silver for the sake of gold. 
He who gave luminous coins for gold, exchanged lustrous pearls for stones. Therefore these people who have more knowledge are humbler, though they are greater. 
He who wore the gold-embroidered robe of the king, suffered in the end from the sword, 
And he who, like quicksilver, did not desire gold, became silver and did not suffer from the sword of Sanjar. 
Since thy poetry is as sweet as honey, do not cheapen it; do not let flies contaminate the sweetness of thy poetry. 
Ho not take even fidelity, unless it is given thee freely. Ho not speak, even if it were to pray, unless they listen to thee. 
Until thou art well versed in the Mohammadan law, beware, be not betrothed to poetry. 
Poetry will seat thee on the Tree of Paradise ; it will make thee ruler of the empire of the spirit. 
Through the Mohammadan law thy poetry will reach a stage where the shadow of thy girdle will reach to the Gemini. 
Poetry will give thee a princely name; for Poets are the princes of words. 
Like heaven, thou shouldst not rest, until thy poetry is as high as heaven. 
Humble thyself like the candle; die during the day and live during the night.
When the steed of thought gallops hotly, the swift heaven slackens its speed. 
It is better to accept words slowly, so that thou ma.yest receive them from a sublime hand.
If thou dost riot approve whatever is shown thee behind this veil, they will show thee a better thing. 
If thou aequirest a pearl, do not wear it immediately ; seek a better one than thou hast. 
He who bore his standard on this road, carried off the ball from the sun and won the race from the moon. 
Though his inspiration did not move quickly, he did not slacken his effort for one moment. 
When his thought moved swiftly, he won the race from heaven; yet he w T as still unsatisfied. 
The pinions of Gabriel were his steed; the wings of the angel Esrafil were his fan. 
Do not sacrifice to others this seed. Do not entrust this string to any man. 
The fig tree would be bare, if every bird could eat figs. 
I who am perfect in this art, am worthy to be seen, for I am true. 
The temple of poetry was founded by me; the art of poetry was freed from the tavern. 
The ascetic and the monks rushed towards me ; they threw down their cloaks and belts.
I still am like a rose-bud; I still expect the north wind. 
If I show the new poetry, my voice will be the trumpet call of the day of resurrection. 
Everyone, young and old, is fascinated by the magic of my words. 
My art has removed the patience of magic; my magic is the spell which deceives the angels. 
My Babylon is Ganjeh which seduces Harut; my Venus is my mind which lights the stars.  The Venus of this zone pertains to Libra; therefore it possesses spiritual speech. 
Night is the food of my lawful magic; it has blotted out the recipe of Harut. 
The image of Nezami, my thought, lives by my lawful magic.  Describing the night and cognizing the heart 
When the defeat of the sun caused the earth to throw its shield on the water, 
The world was more exhausted than the sun and yellower than its shield.
When the sun threw dow»n its shield, its army drew their swords meaning to slay it. 
When the ox which is adorned with beads, falls, all draw their daggers. 
When the child of night caught hold of its nurse, she tied the bell of the day onto its ankles. 
To dispel its fear of the night, she prepared for it an elixir from the dust. 
The dust became the breath of its Messiah and threw water on the fire of its melancholy. 
The draught agreed with the patient, and the child left the house of fear. 
The patient lost a bowlful of blood and became black as ink from head to foot. 
The inner colour appeared externally. Providence said : It was of the unbelievers. 
Each moment, to charm the heart, the night played a different scene.
At times it adorned the garment of the moon with roses; at other times it caused the harp of Venus to scatter silver coins. 
I, on such a moonless night, was the nightingale of that paradise which was without a garden. 
I mingled the blood of my heart with speech and lit a fire with the water of my heart. 
When I held discourse with my own words in my solitude, I pondered on his counsel : 
The Angel of solitude called to me, saying : Borrow in such wise that thou mayest be able to repay. 
Why is there water in this thy pure fire? Why is desire the slave of thy dust? 
 Entrust the feverish dust to the coffin; expend the burning fire on rubies. 
 Do not shoot arrows, because thy judgment is the target. Do not strike, for the horse is thine own foot. 
 Sit no longer unheeding; if thou hast water pour it out on the threshold of the Heart. 
 In the curve of this lovely azure dome, sing the beautiful song of the Heart. 
 Escape from the senses which are the robbers. The Heart knows thy road, know thou the Heart. 
 These heavenly wayfarers who are free from the body, have fastened the pinions of the Archangel Gabriel to their Hearts, 
 And he who has abandoned both worlds, receives nourishment by begging at the door of the Heart. 
 If this material water and clay were the Heart, thou must needs admit that the ass also has a Heart.  All creatures live in virtue of their life; live thou by thy Heart, that is true life. 
 The eye and the ear are superfluous to the divine purpose; they are the ministers of the outward veil. 
 Thine ear is filled with cotton like the calyx of the rose; thine eyes are the ulcers on the eye of thy reason. 
 Oh thou, who brandest both the narcissus and the rose, why dost thou worship them? 
 The vigour of youth is fire enough for the eye which is the mirror of all unworthiness. 
 When poetic talent is wedded to reason, one expects profit from forty years of life. 
 At forty years, when he reaches maturity, the expenses of his journey are increased. 
 Thou needest a friend now; do not recite spells; do not now learn the lesson of forty years.
 Stretch out thy hand and seek a remedy; seek a Heart sympathetic to these sorrows of the heart. 
 Do not grieve, truly the Heart will console; if the Heart is thy friend, thou wilt conquer thy sorrow. 
 The help of friends is a great solace to the wretched who is vanquished by grief. 
 A hundred of his sorrows will vanish, when for a moment he is warmed by friendship. 
 When the first dawn raises its banner, the next dawn challenges the stars. 
 If the second dawn did not come to its aid, the first dawn would be humbled.
 Of thyself, thou canst do nothing; seek a friend, because nothing is better than a friend.
 Although not every country is Khar, seek a friend, because nothing is better than a friend. 
 Everyone needs a friend, especially a helpful friend. 
 These few friends that thou hast, are full of desire ; they are less helpful than the knocker on the door. 
 Hold fast to the saddle strap of the Heart; thy honour is to be the slave of the Heart. 
 When the Lord of the heavenly Throne created the universe, he created the empires of form and soul. 
 In a fitting order, he joined the form -with the soul. 
 From these two lovers, the Heart was born, a child who attained the Caliphate. 
 The Heart to which the proclamation of kingship is read, is a union of the physical and the spiritual natures. 
 The lustre of thy world comes from the Canopus of thy Heart. The form and the soul are both parasites on the Heart. 
When the word of the Heart reached my brain, the oil of my brain fed the light of my lamp. 
I listened intently in this company and made my soul the target of the angel of the soul. 
I gained eloquence from this nourishment. I was full of happiness, and my sorrows vanished.
I wept cold tears, because the fire of my Heart had heated me. 
I released my hands from those fetters. The robbers were impotent, and I was strong. Galloping on that road. I travelled two stages, until with one bound I reached the door of the Heart.
I went to the Heart, and my life nearly expired. Half my life passed in that midnight.
At the door of my spiritual sanctuary, the polo- stick of my body bent into a ball. 
My polo-stick carried off the ball. My head bent to my feet. 
My feet and my head were joined together. I was a ball and appeared like a polo-stick. 
I lost control of my affairs and became unconscious of myself. I saw a hundred things as one, and one thing as a hundred.
My fellow travellers were ignorant, and I was a novice on the journey. My exile was more bitter than my loneliness. 
There was no way by which I could pass through that door; I had no power to enter; neither could I retreat. 
Since I had lost my speech in that tunnel, Love, the guide, held my reins. 
I knocked at the door; he said :  Who comes at this hour?  I replied :  If it would please thee to give audience, it is a human being. 
The leaders drew back the curtain and destroyed the veil of form ; 
Therefore the noblest in the house called, saying: Enter Nezami. 
I became the most favoured confidant of that threshold. I was called on to enter, and I went still further in. 
I found a court brilliantly lit. May the evil eye be turned from that scene.There were seven rulers in one house, seven stories in one fable. 
The empire was greater than that of the heavens. How rich is the clust of that land ! 
In the country of the breath of the warm breeze , the mid-day sun was seated on the throne. 
A horseman, dressed in red, stood in reverence before him. One, dressed like a ruby, was his counsellor of victory. 
A bitter youth was his advance guard in the chase; below him was a black slave, drinking the dregs. 
A lasso thrower sat in ambush; an invulnerable one wore silver armour. 
All these were the moths, and the Heart was the candle. They were all scattered, but the Heart was collected. 
I became the contented guest of the Heart and gave my soul as an offering to the sovereign Heart. 
When I found the banner of the army of the Heart, I turned away my face from the whole world. 
The Heart said tenderly :  Oh thou speechless one, seek the bird and leave this nest. 
 My fire does not confide in this smoke, because that is the salt, and this piece is not even salted. 
 My shadow has more power than this cypress. My foot is above this stage. 
 I am a treasure, but not in the purse of Aaron. 
I am not with thee; neither am I outside thee. 
Through the warm breath of the Heart, the bird of my lips shed the feathers of its tongue in shame. 
I bowed my head in shame; my ears wore the ring of servitude out of respect. My master, the Heart, renewed my covenant and made the name of Nezami resound in heaven. 
As I saw no escape from discipline, I received my training from that master.
When my trainer began to break me in, he freed me from the knots of the nine spheres of heaven. 
Though the rope was full of knots, he did not give up the struggle to untie them, 
Until this affair reached a stage where the knots in the rope were untied. 
Briefly, the piaster who is in our prison, although he is not God, yet he is our Lord. 
He is my guide in both worlds; otherwise why should he be anxious about my soul? 
Though I have not often been in accord with him, yet he will not withhold his affection from me. 
That trainer tamed me, when he became a slave to me who was untamed. 
He was not defeated by such as me. He considered association with dust as a gain. 
One day, from this Egypt which shelters Poti- pliar’s wife, Joseph-like he came out of the well. 
When the eyes of night closed in sleep, they lit the eye of the lamp of dawn. 
The dawn became a lamp, illuminating the sky; the black cloak of night turned into the red border of the day. 
The master took a lamp, held my hand, and led me to a garden.
He freed my skirt from the thorn of grief, when he filled my lap with roses.
I laughed like the lips of the tulip and tore my garment in a hundred places like the rose. 
The tulip entrusted its own heart to my soul; the rose girded my loins with its own belt. 
At times I blushed all over like one drunk with wine; a.t other times I blossomed out like a rose. 
I hurried from rose to rose and from branch to branch to where the water was gushing forth, 
Until the banner of love reached a place where a perfume of fidelity scented the air. 
A subtle breeze with an eloquent tongue, like the breath of Messiah, made my heart live. 
It cast down my litter and gave my steed to the wind. 
It said to me :  Dismount and do not speak of thyself; otherwise I will separate thee from thyself.
I, who was like a boat on that water, was calmed by that heavenly breeze. 
The water was flowing, and I dismounted; parched with thirst, I reached the bank of the river.
It was a spring brighter than the sun; the Prophet Khezr had not seen it even in his dreams in heaven. 
Its jasmine garden was a resting place; its open narcissus would lull one to sleep. 
It was on the circle of heaven; the ambergris of the perfume of Paradise was its slave. 
The rose had a place on the bosom of the jasmine; the thorn trod on the skirt of the rose. The gazelle and the fox had given musk to the rose and fur to the thorn in that meadow. 
The parrot had shed its feathers on the grass because of that sweetly smelling rose. 
The green herbs were as beautiful as the plumage of parrots.. The gazelles were fattened by their sweetness. 
The north wind blew through the bower of roses. The gazelles ate flowers from the branches of the herbs. 
The variegated daisies were massed together and fanned the air with grey ambergris. 
Its scene gave collyrium like the narcissus. Its vegetation was tiger lilies like emerald. 
The jasmine and the rose robbed the caravan. The turtle dove and the nightingale sang together. 
The day-lily with the tongue of Jesus showed the hand of Moses to the dawn. 
The ring dove, crying in the dawn, made the heavens grey with its sighs. 
The breeze was writing the story of the rose upon the leaves of the palm willow with a hand of hope. 
At times the spring came to greet the meadow; at times the rose came in thanksgiving to the thorn. 
The white jasmine had pitched its tent on the plain ; the pennon on the tent pole reached to the Pleiades. 
The tulip came to the fire temple of mystery and prayed like the Indian Magi. 
The black tulip and the white jasmine were like the crow and the Canopus Star of Yaman. 
The boat of the garden, with red and yellow banners, had windows of lapiz lazuli. 
The water was smooth like ermine; how beautiful is ermine with sable  
The branches were stirred by the light of heaven and scattered silver coins beneath the feet of the shadows. 
The shadows spoke with their lips of sunshine. The pebbles were alive swimming in the water. 
The white rose was blistered by the kisses of the hyacinth; the lips of the rose were chafed by the eyelashes of the bud.
As the quiver of the dandelion was empty of _arrows, sometimes it asked for a shield and sometimes for quarter.
The willow, struck by magic, trembled; the tulip was the censer for its incense. 
The meadow was so full of life that it wished to fly; the jasmine was so delicate that it wished to drop. 
The sugar cane had sprouted with sweet laughter; the brown rose bush had come forth with red shoes. 
The self-whiled wild rose spoke by the breath of the wind. 
The sky was greener than the leaf of the tangerine tree and had appeared at morning with an orange in its hand.
Since the sky had decorated its banner in that place, the meadow demanded its boat. 
Every knot on the string of that green table-cloth was the life of the earth and the heart of the sky. 
It seemed as though the star of good omen said to the earth in the morning : Mayest thou be happy ’ ’, 
Or that the sky had passed by and exchanged its emeralds for rubies. Tlie spring was brighter than the eyes of the celestial maidens, that it might dim the source of the light of the sun. 
The verdure had made its ablutions at that spring, gave thanks for its purification, and arose. 
The bird had inhaled the perfume of Solomon from the rose; therefore it sang the songs of David. 
The claws of the partridge, stained with the blood of the pheasant, hung a chain around the bole of the cypress tree. 
The law-givers of the garden ordained for the nightingale the death of the crow. 
The secret of the heart of the owl whose body was the product of that land, was his own death sentence. 
The north wind, with the help of radiant Canopus, tanned the rough leather of the earth to smoothness. 
The tulip was breathless with the palpitation of its heart, because of the speed with which it had hastened. 
The shadow of the beauty-loving box tree had laid its hand on the heart of the tulip. 
The silvery fingers of the dawn-coloured jasmine had taken from the night the whole of its crescent moon.
The Joseph-like sun, roped with gold, dug the pit of the dimple of the jasmine. 
The earth had put on a robe of yellow muslin like the Jews, because the water showed its white hand like Moses. 
The earth had made a medicine of that water, and whatever it had swallowed it brought forth again. 
The light of the dawn had found the arena free. The branches gave leave to the breeze to walk in the shade.
The shadows bit the lips of the sun, and the wind combed the tresses of the willow. 
Shadow and sunshine danced on the banks of the stream through the banners of the branches. 
The thorn became aloe-wood which was my object, and the fire of the rose was the censer for that incense. 
The stalk of the rose was the pulpit of the nigiitingale, and the tendrils of the violet were the girdle of the rose. 
The bird sang more sweetly than David; the rose scattered more nectar than Nezami.  The fruit of the first seclusion 
The wind lifted the veil sideways. The master hastily returned to his love-making.
He saw one with scented breath and sweet laughter, who had given colour to the rose and sweetness to sugar. 
The intrigues of that beauty, clothed in muslin, had burnt the harvest of the moon, as a fire burns reeds. 
From her tresses she had woven armour to her waist. She was beautiful from head to foot. 
Since to see her dazzled the eyes, whosb beheld her shed salt tears. 
Since her savour had been mixed with sweetness, it destroyed the sweetness of the beauties. 
The parrot of the garden was put to shame by her sweetness. Her chin had a ring like that on the head of the parrot. 
Close to that beautiful orange-shaped chin, a silvery neck was formed on her breast.
Cherisher of drunkards like the rose of the garden, destroyer of repentance like the wine of a friend,
Her lips, like a Tabari, had in them the red wood of Tabarestan with which they crush the sugar cane. 
She was a red rose fresher than sugar cane, a dry sugar candy full of rose water. 
Her black mole which burnt the heart, was the ambergris pounded in the oyster shell of the dawn. 
Yearning for that black mole, the full moon became a mole. 
Her eyes burnt the heart more than the sun; her lips illuminated the night more than the moon. 
Because of the baggage of the pilgrim hearts which surrounded her for miles, the road to her was as narrow as her mouth. 
My heart was broken in my breast by that hard heart of hers which destroyed hearts. 
She spoke with a sweet smile on her lips; her face pleaded, and her airs and graces were magical. 
Like a casket of gems, she had closed her mouth and had left an opening only as large as a bead. 
When love saw that casket and that bead, it performed wonders and spread the magician’s carpet. 
It loosened the burden of form from my girdle and freed my soul from the fetters of the body. 
My burden became unbearable, because the water of life passed my lips. 
Our magical reason saw a demon; it suffered iron chains to gain this silver. 
The heart which was relieving its sorrows with joy, was closing the eyes of the sun with clay. 
The companion which takes away grief, is grief itself. The remedy for one suffering from the after effects of wine is the wine itself. 
Oh thou, whose brow is marked by my brand, and who art ignorant of my meadow and my garden, 
The meadow was Heaven, and the vision its Splendour. The garden was the night and tears its water. 
And she whose face was jealously veiled, was the mirror for the face of sincerity. 
For a long time my head rested on my knees, until I understood this mystery. 
I have made this journey on the road of certainty. Go thou on the road by which I have travelled. 
Thou hast not the secret of this road, beware, leave Nezami’s work to Nezami.
One night, the master, desiring the company of his own kind, spent a few moments with some of them. 
He found a night as beautiful as the dawn, and everything desired was present : 
An assembly more radiant than the beginning of spring, a joy more tranquil than providence. 
Yearn thou for a glimpse of its radiance, describing Joseph and his shirt. 
The guardian night had destroyed the watchman, and its sweetness was forbidden to flies.
The minstrels were wonderful in their melody, the veiled beauties wonderful in their fidelity. 
The jar was in the hennaed hand of the beloved, pouring wine into crystal cups.
The candle of the heart was burning like the heart of a candle; the fire of the heart burnt like the heart of fire.
On the tray of the censer which illuminated the assembly, the aloe-wood made sugar, and the sugar consumed the aloe-wood.
The rose scattered sugar from rose-water, the candle gold from its wick. 
To provide the delicious sweetmeats served with the wine, eyes and mouths poured sugar and almonds. 
Sugar and almonds discoursed of subtleties; 
Venus and Mars wooed one another. 
The promise had reached the ear; laughter begged for nourishment.
The beloved, like a leopard, sat on fox furs; the musk of the gazelle was a chain for the lion. 
The beloved drew the lover to herself and trailed her skirt on the ground. In her dance, her hands scattered gems. 
Like the cup-bearer, the candle had a bowl of wine in its hands; the bowl was stained with wine, and the moth was intoxicated. 
Sleep, like the moth, had shed its wings; the candle had bowed its head in thanksgiving. 
Chaste Venus was entirely absorbed in playing the right melody. 
Minds robbed each other of sleep. Lamps borrowed lights from each other. 
One could find among that company in one instant all that one would find in a whole lifetime. 
Bach moment the heart, the body, and the soul provided food for each other. 
One would say that, from the room which they had prepared, they had thrown the garment of annihilation into non-existence. 
The bird of joy tied the letter to its wing; it broke the seven wings of the bird of the Pleiades. 
The fire of the bird of dawn, roasting on the spit, cooled the heart of the beauties. 
The bird of dawm was in a deeper sleep than one asleep in the early morning. The foot of heaven was tied tighter than the hand of the moon. 
The knocker on the door was a barrier against strangers. The tresses of the fairies were the chains of the insane. 
In the curve of that ring the heart of Jupiter was caught as though in a tight finger-ring. 
The beauties, like fairies, had raided the hearts of the nobles. 
They had planted jasmine on the road of the heart ; they had collected the thorns with the tips of their eye-lashes. 
The sugar cane of their cheeks was the fruit of the heart; their tall stature was the rose tree of life. 
The sugared hazel-nuts and the small almonds had lines like carmine-coloured pistachio-nuts. 
The magic coquetry and the black mole had wrought a lawful spell by the black eyebrows. 
The w r orld was constantly bewitched and enslaved by such coquetry a,nd such a beauty spot. 
After the eyes saw those beautiful visions, the heart went on pilgrimage to the eyes. 
The tongues of airs and graces were sharper than thorns; the tresses were more entangled than my affairs. When the hand of coquetry held the bow, it hit the mark without shooting the arrow. 
The spirit of Messiah blew from the breath of the heart, and the water of life poured out from the mouth of the clay. 
The rose, like the jasmine, contained ambergris; the moon, like heaven, carried a. saddle-cloth on its shoulders. 
When the cheeks and the lips of the beloved poured out sugar and almond, the rose fled to get help from the sugar. 
Each vision was the life of a world; every eyelash was the temple of the idol of the soul. 
The black tresses on the white silver scattered musk upon the leaves of the palm willow. 
Her silvery neck which had a line as clear as water, became a rainbow in the shining sun. 
The tresses were Abraham, and the face was his fire; the eyes were Ishmail and the eyelashes his dagger. 
From these the fire had become a bunch of sweet herbs, and from those the dagger a heart-ravishing narcissus. 
Like wine, the kisses produced intoxication; like Messiah, the lips gave the breath qf life. 
The perspiration on her cheek was like dew on red and white roses. The harvest of the moon was like the cluster of the Pleiades. 
The button of the collar of the celestial maiden was loosened; it was as though the line of night had received the decree of the light. 
The spirit of the high and the heart of the lowly were, by that light, maddened like those in delirium. 
Her airs and graces were the herald, as her mouth was tired; her eyes spoke, as her tongue was speechless. 
Wine, like the rose, was the ornament of the empire; the bowl, like the narcissus, was gold in silver. 
In that circle reason was intoxicated, and in the end it lost patience. 
Since laughter had not left room in the mouth, endurance was unable to sigh.
Patience had exhausted its melody on that note ; the rebellion of the mind had a high note. 
The rebellion found in the songs of David the story of Mahmud and the tale of Ayaz. 
The poetry of Nezami scatters sugar and is perpetually on the lips of the beautiful singers of odes.  The fruit of the second seclusion 
Life spent on that carpet, woven in eternity, is spent profitably. 
The ear congratulates it on that work, and the eyes read in it songs of adoration. 
The laughter of its beauties saddens sweetness; sight takes collyrium from the eyes of the fair gazelles. 
There my beloved, like the moon, dressed in muslin, has broken my heart like a reed. 
The moon which had cast away the night, had on that night remained until daybreak. 
When the arrows of her airs and graces flew swiftly, the soul came forward as her target, kissing the ground.
Her light filled the eyes of the candle with tears ; jealousy of her beauty ulcerated the eye of the lamp. 
The heart accepted in good faith every oppression of her tyranny as a sign of blessing.
At times, she was the verdure and I the stream of water; and at times, I was the bleacher and she the sun. 
I have no knowledge of that fruit of which I partook on that night. 
How could I have known that the new moon, whose girdle is light, would keep away from her lovers? 
She was in love with her own lover; her desire was a hundred times greater than mine. 
The heart in its desire says :  What harm could have come to our day, had it not burnt the veil of our night, 
 And had it made the night safe, that it might have endured to the day of resurrection?  
I search everywhere for the light of that night which was like the sun, and do not find it even in my dreams. 
I have had happiness only on that night; I have had no happy night since it bade me farewell. 
Since then I call upon God every night, praying that He may grant me that same vision. 
That was a clear day, not a dark night. It was night, but the night of the Ascent to Heaven. 
The moon, digging out rubies from the mine of heaven, dies every night of desire for that night. 
The day, which is the sworn enemy of the night, yearns also for that same night.  I was carefree, when suddenly the sun, brandishing its sword, came in down the path of the dawn. 
The fire of the sun caused water to flow from my eyes on to my body. 
The clouds came to the garden playfully, cleansing the garments of the sun. 
At this well-spring of the dawn, many vessels such as thou and I have been broken. 
Heaven had gilt the pure silver of its stars with the golden leaves of the sun. 
The sleeping Dawn awoke swiftly with a dagger in her hand, prepared to shed blood. 
I threw down my shield on her battle-field and made my soul my shield against her dagger. 
To kill me, Dawn sprang from the stream, killing the thirsty one and destroying the bridge. 
A voice cried from my desolation, saying :  Oh Dawn, is this my punishment? 
 Formerly, when I had a companion, I had many candles to lighten my darkness. 
What did I gain from that night and that candle which departed from me? They vanished as though they had never been there. 
 Sting him who ate thy honey; destroy him who humbled thee. 
 Destroy the strong, because that is permissible; to destroy the weak is easy.
When the Dawn saw my weeping, she shed tears of blood on the morn in sympathy. 
The harvest of the day was burnt by my sorrow. The source of the sun was saddened by my sighing. 
In spite of all my suffering, heaven gave me hope. The snake of the night gave me the bead of the sun. 
I know not how I felt the effect of the light of the daw r n, though I knew it. 
He who found the road to this moving cradle, found more than the light of the dawn. 
Oh thou, whose days of pleasure have shamefully blackened the face of thy nights, 
I who have described this night, have described it from personal experience. 
The night is the curtain of solitude; the candle is the jewel of vision. 
The aloe-wood and the rose-water are the groans and the tears of the weary. 
All the beauty of that seat of honour was the light of the Night of Power. 
Who under this heaven is trusted with the secrets veiled by the curtain of solitude? 
The dawn which has learnt to be like a moth, has never seen a more beautiful candle. 
Strive to be burnt by that candle, so that, like Nezami, thou mayest reach the light.
In the beginning, when the worship of love was not, there was no rumour of existence in non-existence. 
One chosen, prepared in the secrecy of nonexistence, entered into existence and opened its door.
He was the last-born child of the spirits and the first of the children of man. 
He raised the banner to rule, and like the banner he fell and he rose again. 
His pure quality is  He taught Adam. The honour of his dust is He kneaded his clay. 
His essence is both opaque and transparent. He is at the same time the touch-stone, the gold, and the money-changer. 
He is the new idol who disturbed the angels, the only bearer of the new order, the mirror of the sons of the dust. 
He is the bracelet on the arm of the soul; his arm carries the bracelet of the seven heavens. 
He is rocked in the two cradles and is the essence of the two gems mixed together. 
He bestows the robe of honour on the prisoners ; he is the watchman and the cup-bearer of the angels. 
He is honoured by being the beginning of creation ; he broke the virginity of creation. 
He was a tongue-tied child forty days old, yet teaching the sage forty years of age. 
He came like a love letter beautifully written, like a rose tree from the garden of Paradise. 
A light from the all-seeing eyes, a bird from the highest tree of Paradise. 
He throws grain to the birds of heaven, therefore all bow down before him, 
And he, for the sake of one grain, generously threw down the garment and the glory 
And was caught in the snare by a grain which was not worthy of acceptance; 
Therefore prayers came into being, and the whole world bowed down to him.  
At the door of the cynosure of all eyes, exception was made to the prostration of a rebel.
He scattered rose petals from the eight gardens on all, but brands on Satan. 
He had no joy without thee and could not rest a moment in the garden of Eram. 
He was not able to rule, because he was burdened with anxiety for thee. 
The love of wheat burned his heart; it split his heart as wheat is split. 
Through his newly created love of us, eating wheat became of small account to him.
He who like wheat had neither forefathers nor descendants, could not prosper without the earth and the grindstone. 
Until he was thrown down, his desire was not realised, and he -was not honoured until he was crushed. 
His body was coloured like straw and was blistered like the starry sky. 
Like barley and wheat, he was tested in the earth for thy sake, oh hypocrite. 
Through eating that unworthy wheat, he was stripped like a grain of wheat. 
All the humiliation which he suffered from the enemy was caused by his desire to partake of that wheat, 
The wheat caused him great distress, and eating it was unwise. 
When mankind began to eat w r heat, the wheat opened its mouth wide. 
Oh thou, who hast lost sight of the purpose of life, thy snare has been that grain of wheat.
Partake of barley bread and be patient; do not eat of the wheat which deceived Adam. 
Thou art the secret voice of the Heart, do not follow Satan; thou art the lion of the prince, do not be the dog of the door-keeper. 
It is impossible to wash the dirt from thy skin, unless thou repentest like Adam. 
To ask pardon befits him who has done a wrong, because Adam prospered through repentance. 
When Adam desired that grain, he was thrown out onto the field of the earth.
He saw that his desire of this grain was unprofitable, and that he was entangled in this snare.
He watered this withered rose and pitched his tent in Ceylon. 
He fled there, shamed by this sin, and threw that black dust on to his head. 
For a time, through the bad omen of the skies, he mourned in India. 
When the blackness of sin was washed from his hands, the indigo plant grew at his feet. 
He became white and beautiful like the moon; he hid the tresses of sin under his cap. 
When through repentance his heart was purified, he became the ruler of the empire of this earth. 
He planted the seed of fidelity in the land of justice and endowed us with the produce of that field. 
He left in this room with six doors all that the treasurer of Paradise gave him. 
Partake of this produce, because it is for thy benefit; he planted and thou must reap. Aloe-wood is burnt by the fire in the censer. The toil of the ass is for the ease of the saddle-maker. 
When thy affairs were settled in thy absence, they singled thee out for favours. 
Float like a rose on the waves of spring, that thou mayest not be anchored in the garden like a thorn. 
Go on bravely when thou seest autumn, because timidity burns the soul. 
Thou hast the appearance of a lion, but thou art not lion-hearted. Although thou hast a heart, thou hast no courage. 
One can paint a lion on a wall, but a hundred blows will not move it from its place. 
The heavenly robe does not befit thee; thou art dust and nothing but dust befits thee. 
The good fortune of thy affair declines; thy heart is small and thy sorrows great; 
Otherwise, why should the high heaven imprison in a city a conqueror like thee. 
Gird up thy loins like the circle. Thou art in the circle of heaven, treat heaven gently. 
It is the nature of fire to travel swiftly; it is good not to lag behind in the race. 
Be like water and run swiftly, because running water is precious. 
Those who are slim possess the gem of the body ; the soul is valuable, because it is ethereal. 
A light breeze is like a soul in its movement; thou art heavier than the mountain of Qaf. 
If thou art not deceived by colour like a thorn, do not admire thyself like a violet.
The house is polished, and thy face is everywhere ; therefore thine eye looks a,t thyself. 
Although thou art reflected on every side, yet thou art none of those reflections. 
Thou art thine own lover and a worshipper of form; therefore thou hast a mirror in thy hand like the heavens. 
If thou shouldst taste a particle of thine own flavour, thou wouldst withdraw from this tastelessness. 
Renounce tyranny, take refuge in fidelity. What is mankind? Take refuge in God. 
Look at His goodness and follow His example; confess thine own sin. 
When thou prayest in shame, His bounty will be thy merciful helper. 
The story of the king who despaired, and of how he was forgiven 
A just ruler saw a tyrant in a dream. 
He said to him :  How did God treat thee, the tyrant, on the night of thy death on account of thy tyranny?  
He answered :  When my life ended, I looked upon all creation 
 To see from whom I could expect guidance, or upon whom God had looked with favour. 
 No man had any care for me in his heart; none had any thought of helping me. 
I trembled like the willow; my face was covered with shame, and my heart was filled with despair. 
 I gave up all my hopes and relied upon the forgiveness of God,  Saying : ‘ Thou, before whom I am humbled and ashamed, forgive the wretched and pass on. 
 Although I have disobeyed Thy command, do not reject me, since I am rejected by all men.
 Either punish me by fire, or do the contrary to what all others do. 
 When the Eriend saw me shamed before Him, the Eriend of the friendless aided me. 
My words moved the grace of His generosity ; He cast off my burden and raised me up.
Every remorseful breath drawn is a safeguard against the tumult of the day of resurrection. 
Oh thou, who weighest the wind, all thy words are but a measure of loss and scales for toil. 
Suppose that thou hadst had this measure of loss for years and for months, and that thou hadst lived through these months and these years, 
Thy scales are without weights and pearls; thy measure is empty, and thy span of life is full. 
Do not make the weight of the earth the stone in thy scales; do not make an amulet of the bead of clay. 
That to which thou art a slave, is but a silver coin ; that by which thou art alive, is but a breath. 
Give back that which thou takest from behind this veil; do not take it thyself, give what thou canst, 
Until that day when it will be well for thee to have thy neck free and thy mouth empty. 
The debts of orphans will not weigh thee down, and the burden of widows will not be on thy shoulder.
Leave this old worn-out carpet; cast away this stained garment.  
Either take thy provision for the road like a stranger, or abandon the world like Nezami.
Oh thou, whose judgment is the ruler of all who have life; oh thou, whose foot is the jewel of crowned kings, 
If thou art a king, seek a royal palace; if thou art a gem, seek the divine crown. 
From the world beyond which there is no road, and of which only thou and I have knowledge, 
Thou hast been regarded with the greatest favour by that Light which is cherished in eternity. 
Thou art a rare coin, and thy city is the world. All the currency of the world is thine, coin by coin. 
The empire with its affairs and authority is thine; be proud, this happiness is thine. 
Thy circle is wider than the circle of heaven; thou art worth more than both worlds. 
The dawn holds the mirror, only that thou mayest see thine own face. 
The motion of this cradle which is thy temple, is but to lull thee to a sweet sleep like a child. 
Thou art both the bird of the heart and the breath of life. If there is any like thee, it is thyieelf. 
The heart of the sun, which is full of fire, is happy, because it sees thy face.
The moon, which wanes to the fineness of thy hair, laughs when she sees thy face. 
Enjoy the world, because thou art greater than all. Do not grieve; thou art not the slave of the world.
Be humble to all like the dust of the earth; be free of all like the wind.
Earth is better alone by itself; wind-blown earth becomes dust. 
Give thy heart to God and be happy; this is a further kingdom for thee. 
Say : 'Where is the knowledge of religion and piety? Where are we, and where is trust? 
News of the other side of the world is given to the heart which has received the mark of religion. 
Strive for religion, because thou hast the world, that thou mayest possess thyself of the other world also. 
Since religion cannot be bought with the things of this world, one should not listen to the orders and prohibitions of the devil. 
Every barleycorn weight of the essence of this amber is worth a stone of alchemy. 
Throw- away the stone and take the jewel; give the dust of the earth and take the gold. 
He who gives thee the provision for the road, takes one portion from thee and gives thee ten in exchange. 
There is no better investment than this; take thy profit; indeed thou canst not lose. 
Thy work is appointed to foster religion; just kings have acted in this way. 
To administer justice is right thinking. To be free from these people is the best calling. 
If thou art the benefactor of the city and the army, the whole city and army will wish thee well.
Tyranny destroys the empire. The empire endures by kindness to its subjects.
There is a reckoning; come, and before that end observe thine own works and take warning. 
Seek peace for the people; why injure them ? What can be the result of injustice but shame? 
Reason is in a deep sleep of intoxication; the ship of prudence is in a whirlpool. 
Suppose that thou hast possessed thyself of the belongings of the weak; suppose that thou hast tyrannously seized the goods of the orphans,
On the day of resurrection which is the day of judgment, wilt thou not be ashamed of thy excuses? 
Turn thy face to religion, because it is a strong support; turn thy back to the sun, because it is worshipping fire.
This game of the golden ball is fatal like arsenic. Do not pursue games like a sick woman. 
Everything in this tent with nine pegs is the sport of this fatal game. 
Blow it out from thy mind as with the breath of the Messiah. Eree thine own oil from this lamp. 
How much longer, like a moth, wilt thou shed thy wings and throw thy shield down before a lamp? 
Tear this fourth curtain, so that the wrings of Jesus may grow from thy feet. 
He who, like Jesus, gave up his life, truly conquered the world.
One cannot conquer the world by tyranny; one can gain empire by justice.
What portion will injustice give to thee? Injustice gives thee to destruction. Justice is a messenger of good tidings, gladdening wisdom. It is an agent which brings prosperity to the country.
The empire endures through justice. Thy rule will be confirmed by thy justice.  The story of Nushirvan and his visier 
Whilst hunting, the horse of Nushirvan carried him far away from the royal retinue. 
The only companion of the king was his minister ; the king and the minister were alone together. 
In that hunting ground the king saw a village, ruined like the heart of an enemy. 
Two birds were sitting close together; their discussion was closer than the heart of the king. 
He said to the minister :  What is their argument? What is the meaning of their cries to one another?  
The minister said : Oh, the king of the world, I will explain it, if the king would take a lesson. 
 These two voices are not mere singing; they are the proclamation of a marriage ceremony. 
 This bird lias given a daughter in marriage to that other bird and demands from him that the price of mother’s milk be settled in the morning, 
 Saying : ‘ Leave this ruined village to us together with a few more like it.’ 
 The other one answers, saying : ‘ Do not worry about this. See the tyranny of the king and do not grieve.
If we have this same king and this destiny, in a short time I will give thee a hundred thousand ruined villages like this.
These words had such an effect on the king, that he heaved a sigh and began to lament. 
He tore his hair and wept grievously v What can be the result of injustice but tears? 
He gnawed his finger at this oppression. He said :  Look at the oppression which is known even to the birds. 
 See my tyranny which leaves owls for the farmers instead of hens. 
Oh, how negligent and worldly I have been! For this tyranny I shall have to suffer much regret. 
 How long shall I take the property of the people by force? I am unmindful of death and the grave of to-morrow. 
 How long shall I usurp? See how I am playing with my life. 
 God gave me the empire, that I may not do that which is unworthy. 
 My base metal is covered with gold; yet I do what is prohibited. 
Why should I spoil my good name by oppression? I oppress others, alas! I oppress myself. 
 May there be a truer justice in my heart. Let me be ashamed either before God or before myself. 
To-day I am the embodiment of oppression. Alas for the exposure of my to-morrow! 
 My unproductive body is fuel. For this grief my heart burns for my heart.
 How long shall I raise the dust of injustice, spill my own glory and the blood of others?
 On the day of resurrection, they will call me in question for this spoilation.
 I am shameless, if I am not humbled now.. My heart is of stone, if I do not grieve now. 
 See how long I will suffer reproach, that I may bear this shame till the day of resurrection. 
 That which bears me is, in truth, my burden. That which is my remedy is, indeed, my poison. 
 Of these countless jewels and treasures, what did Sam take, and what did Feridun carry away? 
 And of this pow’er and empire which is mine, what in the end shall I possess?  
The king became so heated over this matter, that the shoe of his horse melted from his haste. 
When he reached his camp and royal standard, the hope of kindness spread over the country. 
Immediately, he remitted the taxes on the overtaxed land. He abolished bad customs and the ways of injustice. 
He spread justice and destroyed tyranny, and to his last breath he remained faithful to this. 
He has gone, arid after many turns of the wheel of fortune, the fame of his justice remains. 
In the empire of the spiritually-minded, the die of his name bore the impress of justice. 
He found a fortunate ending. He who knocked at the door of justice found this name. 
Pass thy life in making hearts happy, that God may be pleased with thee. 
Seek the protection of the angels. Seek thine own toil and the comfort of thy friends. 
Take away pain and give remedies, that thou mayest reach kingship.
Be warm in love and cold in revenge. Be generous like the moon and the sun. 
The good that he did returned to him who began a good work. 
As an analogy, the revolving dome knows what is due to good and to evil. 
Devote thyself to prayer; turn thy face from sin, that thou mayest not make excuses like sinners. 
Since life in this world is but an hour, spend that hour in devotion, because devotion is better than all. 
Do not make excuses; they do not ask for wiles. These are only words; they demand actions from thee. 
If matters could be simplified by words, the affairs of Nezami would reach heaven.
For a moment, oh master who art garbed in trailing robes, throw away the whole world. 
Do not injure, be the comfort of the afflicted. For an hour, leave thy greatness behind. 
Since the order is to think of the future, power is the slave of poverty. 
Do not ask where is the empire of Solomon. The empire remains, but where is Solomon? 
The bridal chamber is the same which Azra erected. The banquet is the same at which Vameq sat.That bridal chamber and that banquet are now departed. Vameq has fallen and Asra has departed. 
Although the world has existed for many years,, it has not changed by a hair’s breadth. 
The earth is the same powerful enemy. Heaven is the same fatal tyrant. 
Who will desire to associate with the world?’ 
To whom has it been faithful, that it should keep faith with us? 
He who lived on this earth, became dust. What does the dust know of who is in this dust? 
Every rose petal is the cheek of a noble. Every step treads on the head of a prince. 
Why are we old, who have given back our youth to the world? Because we are born of the world. 
Sam, who had a Phoenix to care for his son, was young, though he had an old son. 
The moving dome which is not permanent, desires nothing but what is contrary to thy wishes. 
At times it makes thee the king of the living; at times it makes thee into the potter’s clay. 
Upon this party-coloured carpet, everyone is in despair. 
Those who live in the desert, say :  How happy those who live in the sea. 
And he who suffers hardship in the sea, weaves spells for the pleasures of the desert. 
Humanity is not immune from change; it has security for naught. 
It is necessary to go with this caravan, to leave this litter, and to pass on. He who remains behind in this circle, is driven out of the city and the village. 
The traveller, having a respite, is shown from far off in non-existence. 
Give up empire, because it makes thee proud. 
What light will the darkness of this shadow give thee? 
Thou art spending thy life in play; thou art playing to excess. 
The revolution of this playful-seeming sphere did not allow thee time for play. 
Before reason matured, negligence was pleasant ; how beautiful it was ! 
When the vision of reason reached its limit, the empire of happiness came to an end. 
It is not wise to be negligent; negligence is part of insanity.
Do not sit heedlessly, scribble a few pages; if thou dost not write, sharpen thy pen. 
Do not turn from association with the spiritually minded; do not take thy hand from the belt of the saints. 
The thorn which is the associate of the rose, pours ambergris into the lap of the hyacinth. 
On the day of judgment, when they present the book of our account, they will bring the desert into the arena, 
Saying to it : Oh thou, who art mixed with the blood of the dumb animal, and oh thou, who hast drunk the heart’s blood of the weary, 
 How could thy sands have the water of life? Thou art the desert; thou hast not the blessings of the Euphrates.  
The sand will lament, saying :  I have drunk blood. Do not stone me ; I have not committed a murder.
 I provided salt for a table ; I mixed with some hearts, 
 So that, when I embrace the saints, I shall become the intimate of the bracelet of the celestial maidens. 
When they pass judgment upon it, according to the decree of its nature, they will make it the minstrel wearing anklets in paradise. 
He who chooses good associates, will necessarily profit by it some day.
Good associations have been removed from the world; the honeycomb has become the wasp’s nest. 
Look at the world and see how, because of inhumanity, mankind is on his guard against mankind. 
They have taken spiritual knowledge from mankind ; they have taken humanity away.
Since the heavens revolt against the covenant of Solomon, he is human who is now invisible like a spirit. 
I deemed it advisable to run away from whomsoever I associated with.
The shadow of no man had the glory of the Phoenix; I found no trace of fidelity in the friendship of any man. 
What is the seed of culture? To sow fidelity. What are the rights of fidelity? To observe fidelity. 
To the farmer who sows the seed comes the day when he eats of it.
One day, when Solomon was at liberty, his breath blew out a candle. 
He transferred his court to the country. He set up his throne on this turquoise realm. 
He saw an old farmer in such a state on that arid plain, that his heart was broken. 
He had taken corn from his house and had cast it into the granary of divine generosity. 
He was sowing seed in all directions. An ear of corn grew from each of his grains. 
When he opened his bag of corn, he loosed the tongues of the birds of Solomon. 
One said :  Oh old man, be content, consume that which thou hast. 
 Thou art not a snare, do not scatter grain; do not contend vainly w T ith us. 
 Thou hast no spade, do not scratch the surface of the desert. Thou dost not find water, do not sow the seed of the farmer. 
 What harvest did we obtain, who cultivated a well irrigated land, 
 That thou shouldst produce anything in this parched waterless burning field?  
The old man said : Do not take offence at the answer; I am independent of the produce of earth and water. 
 Water and drought are no concern of mine. I sow the seed, but God helps the growth. 
 My water is the sweat of my body; my spade the tips of my fingers.  
  I have no need for empire or lands. As long as I live, this is enough for me. 
 He who gives good tidings through me, gives me seven hundred grains for each grain that I sow. ’ ’ 
Do not sow grain in company with Satan, so that every seed may produce seven hundred grains. 
One must first sow good seed, that the ear of corn may ripen well. 
Every created form has been endowed with a garment fitted to his stature. 
Not every donkey can carry the garments of Christ. Not every one can be trusted with the secrets of the empire. 
A rhinoceros can eat the neck of a,n elephant; an ant cannot consume more than the leg of a locust. 
The sea is calm in spite of a hundred rivers; a spadeful makes the brook noisy. 
In this circle of lapis lazuli, the position of every man accords with his worth. 
It requires a fortunate patient man not to get tired of his burden. 
Not every soul is worthy of grace; not every womb is pregnant with divine secrets. 
I will not repeat it, because it shows inexperience : the work of Nezami is to carry a load.
Oh thou, who hast thrown down the shield of courage, thy refuge in alienation is thy demon.
Thou art proud of an empire which has no permanence. Thou livest but with a transitory life. 
Thou art unprotected from the wine of the drunkards; thou art the plaything of the games of the stars. 
Thou hast cast away the book and the sword and hast exchanged them for the cup and the flagon. 
Thou hast taken in thy hand the mirror and the comb to admire thy tresses like a beautiful woman. 
See what Rabe’eh did to the dog of the seven men with her own tresses. 
Oh thou, by w r hom merit is shamed, be shamed by the virtue of a widow. 
How long wilt thou lay claim to courage? Boast less, boast less, because thou art less than a woman. 
Reason cannot dispense with virtue. No virtue is greater than justice. 
This water was refreshed but not in thy stream. The mole was beautiful, but not on thy cheek. 
Thou art not heaven, approve of good decrees. Fear high heaven greatly. 
One should display only pure gems; one can make a good profit on this capital. 
It brings misfortune to do injustice, to dishonour oneself, and to shed the blood of others. 
Much has been claimed before now to bring together some great spirits. 
Do justice and fear the spirit of men. Fear the arrow of the complaints of the oppressed. 
Do not despise the spirit when it turns to God, because it has great results.See what the unclean spirits of those two men did to Mahmud’s body ; 
Then see what the spirit of so many pure souls will do with thee on the day of judgment. 
The travellers who follow the angels, are not slower than the tortoise on the road of inspiration. 
Remove the sword of injustice from their path, that thou mayest not suffer their complaints by night. 
Justice is the condition of sovereignty. Behold the condition of the world which is injustice. 
He who did justice in this house for one night, adorned his house for the morrow. 
The story of the old woman and Sultan Sanjar 
An old woman suffered injustice; she laid hold on the skirt of Sanjar, 
Saying :  Oh king, I have seen little of thy justice, and all the year long I have suffered thy tyranny. 
 A drunken watchman came down my street and kicked me sorely. 
 I was innocent, but he forced me from my house and dragged me to the end of the street by my hair. 
 He abused me shamefully and placed the seal of oppression on the door of my house. 
 He said : ‘ Oh hunchback, who killed such a one at midnight in thy street? ’ 
 He searched my house, saying : ‘ Where is the murderer? ’ Oh king, what humiliation could exceed this? 
 When the watchman is intoxicated, a murder is committed. Why should he violently accuse an old woman ? 
 The drunkards consume the revenue of the country ; they carry off old women on false accusations. 
 He who has condoned this tyranny, has destroyed my honour and thy justice. 
 My wounded breast was smitten; there is nothing left of me, body or soul.
 Oh king, if thou dost not do me justice, it will be counted against thee on the day of judgment. 
 Thou art a judge, I see in thee no justice; I cannot acquit thee of tyranny. 
 Strength and help come from kings. Bee what misery comes to us from thee. 
 It is not right to seize the goods of orphans. Cease from it; this is not the usage of nobility.
 Do not rob an old woman of her trifles; be shamed by the grey hairs of an old woman. 
 Thou art a slave, and thou claimest sovereignty. Thou art not a king, when thou workest destruction. 
 The king who attends to the affairs of his kingdom, passes just judgment on his subjects, 
 So that they may all obey his commands and love him in their hearts and souls. 
 Thou hast turned the world upside down. In all thy life what good deeds hast thou really done? 
 The rise of the Empire of the Turks was due to their love of justice. 
 Since thou fosterest injustice, thou art not a Turk, thou art a plundering slave. The houses of the town-dwellers have been ruined by thee. The harvest of the villagers has been ravaged by thee. 
 Reckon with the coming of death. Protect thyself whilst thou canst 
 Thy justice is the lamp illuminating thy night. The companion of thy to-morrow is to-day. 
 Give the old woman joy by thy words, and remember this word of an old woman. 
 Withdraw thy hand from the wretched, that the arrows of the sorrowful may not wound thee. 
" How long wilt thou shoot arrows in every direction? Thou knowest not the spiritual power of the poor 
 Thou art a key to the conquest of the world. Thou wast not created for injustice. 
 Thou art a king to lessen tyranny, and if others wound, thou shouldst heal. 
 The relation of the poor to thee is that of the beloved to the lover. Thy relation to them should be to foster them. 
 Beg at the door of the saints and protect the poor. ’ ’ 
Sanjar who had won the empire of Khorasan, suffered loss when he disregarded these words. 
Justice has vanished in our time; she has taken up her abode on the wings of the Phcenix. 
There is no respect under this blue dome ; no honour remains on this suspended earth. 
Arise Nezami, thou exceedest all limits. Thou woundest the bleeding heart.
How quickly the sweet day of life reached its evening. Dust and wind came together and fire and water. 
Morning has come, why art thou drunken with sleep? The sun has passed the top of the wall. 
Abandon this pursuit of conquest. Do not pretend to youth, old age is here. 
That heart which was wounded by grief, is dry ; it has no longer its former savour. 
Reason is darkened, and judgment is destroyed ; the hand is blistered, and the foot is weary.
Earth desires to bestow favours upon thee; withdraw thy foot; it is the time of rest. 
In this purity and pollution, there is no better comfort than ease. 
The source of thy moonlight has grown cold. Thy cheeks which were fresh like tulips, are yellow. 
Black and white have fought with every part of thy body, from head to foot. 
Time which is thy night and day, teaches thee during thy youth. 
There were many younger than thee in the world who desired not to grow old. 
The wind of autumn carried away the petals of his rose; age came and carried off his youth. 
They have not found fault with youth. There is a saying :  Old age and a hundred faults. 
Even though the kingdom be the kingdom of Jamshid, white hair is the sign of despair.  
White hair brings the message of death; the bent back brings greetings from death.
Who possesses the empire of youth and beauty? It is not mine, oh Lord, tell me whose it is. 
Youth has passed in negligence. It is lamentable, lament therefore. 
If the lost beloved is a Joseph, the loss is grievous. 
Thou knowest not the value of youth ; thou wilt not know it, until thou art old. 
The young tree is the pride of the garden ; when it is old, the gardener cuts it down. 
Although youth is itself all fire, age is bitter, and youth is sweet. 
The new shoot bears the early rose; the dry wood is for the fire. 
Black hair is the beauty of the head. The black stone is the touchstone for gold. 
The days of youth come to an end. Awake, night has passed, and morning has come, awake. 
When camphor subdued the fire of thy nature, it changed the nature of thy musk into that of camphor. 
When the weather is cold for a time, the black cloud brings the white snow. 
Bleaching and dyeing go together. The sun and the Messiah live in the same sphere. 
The quality of water is to bleach; the function of the moon is to colour. 
This blue dome loves changing colour, therefore Jesus practised the dyer’s art. 
Since the air has no colour, it has no weight. 
Do not be party-coloured like day and night; do not have a white face and black cheeks. 
So long as thou seekest hypocrisy, thou bearest the brand of ignorance and darkness. 
On the mountain, the leopard is wounded through the duality of his colour. 
So long as, like the young trees, thou clothest thyself at times in silk and at times in rags, 
Through this contradictory nature thou hast an armour : in the summer thou hast a hundred warm garments, and in the winter thou art naked. 
Eat and drink that which thou canst obtain all the year round like the lion and the leopard. 
So long as thou hast a loaf of bread and a draught of water, do not stretch out thy hand to every bowl. 
If thou hast not enough bread to satisfy thy hunger, who can keep from thee water and herbs? 
It is better to eat grass, like the ass of Jesus, than to beg bread from others. 
The fire of the dust of the curve of this whirlwind will not give bread, unless it takes away man’s honour. 
If in this tower of the imprisoned dead, the fire of the spiritually enlightened gave no heat, 
Why should a wolf be the Joseph of its soul? And why should the lion-hearted be the cat begging at its table? 
Do not grind the grain of thy heart like barley and wheat for the sake of a handful of false wheat.  
Make a relish, like water, of thine own breast for thy bread, and, like fire, roast the flesh of thine own heart.
Eat dust rather than eat the bread of the miser. Thou art not dust, do not suffer the wound of the base. 
Pierce thy heart and hand with the thorn of toil. Do not seek comfort; put thy hand to work. 
It is good that thou shouldst work, so that thou mayest not beg from others.
Somewhere in Syria lived an old man who, like a fairy, shunned mankind. 
He wove his shirt of grass. He made bricks and earned a livelihood thus. 
When the warriors laid down their arms, they made those bricks their shield in the grave. 
He who had only those bricks to cover his grave, even though he were a sinner, was not punished. 
One day the old man was hard at work at this calling. 
By chance there came to him a handsome youth, 
Saying :  What humiliation and degradation is this? Brickmaking is work for an ass. 
 Arise, and do not strike thy sword upon the shield of the dust. They will not grudge thee a loaf of bread. 
Throw this mould into the fire; make thy bricks with some other mould.
 How long wilt thou painfully dig clods from the earth? Why dost thou spend thy time on clay and water ?
 Remember that thou art aged ; leave the work of youth to the young.
The old man said :  Do not be foolish; do not interfere. Do not consider thyself important. 
 The aged make bricks; captives carry loads. 
 I have put my hand to this profession of mine, that I might not one day have to stretch out my hand to thee. 
 I beg for treasure from none. I eat my daily bread through the work of mine own hands. 
 Do not trouble me for this my daily bread. If this is not so, may it be forbidden me. 
The young man went away weeping, because of the reproachful words of the old man. 
This old man was experienced, and his work was acceptable. 
How long, oh Nezami, wilt thou knock at the door of this world? Arise, and knock at the door of religion, if thou wishest to knock.
There is an artist behind this curtain ; otherwise who could have shown these scenes on it? 
Make the eye of thy heart familiar with this curtain to perceive that which comes from behind this veil. 
Behind this blue curtain, he has countless instruments. 
They have lit the gems of their eyes in reverence and have sewn them on the girdle of their heart’s service. 
There is nothing on any point of this circle, which is not working on the line of its circumference. 
These steeds which are saddled, are chosen for us. 
Before the movement of this new creation, and before the new travellers and the old voices, 
Had we not built the foundation of love? Had we not been nourished by love? 
There are evil and good in both worlds; and they have tied both to thy saddle strap. 
There is no companion for the world like thee; the bird of the world has no better grain than thee. 
Leave this bird which is injurious to nature. Be above this bird like the Phoenix. 
The bird, thy Messiah, has wings beneath thee and is above thee. 
Either extricate its claws from the cage; or entrust thine own cage to it, 
That, when it carries the baggage to its destina- - tion, it may carry thee on its protecting wings. 
When thou passest beyond these spheres of dust, they cleanse thy tablet of thee. 
Thou wilt transcend alteration. Thou wilt be entrusted with the divine secret. 
Thou wilt walk with ease in step with the prophets; thou wilt be initiated into the divine temple. 
The two stages of the two worlds are but half a stage of one breath of the Heart. 
He who laid thy foundations on this clay , made the sanctuary of the soul in the temple of the Heart.
Beceive the picture of acceptance from the enlightened Heart; expect naught from the black carpet of the body.
The morning breeze draws collyrium to the eye of the narcissus. Alchemy dyes the garment in copper.
What is the body? It is a handful of clay. Only the Heart counts, because the Word is in the Heart. 
Be the slave of the Heart, that thou mayest be a king, the master of reason, and the ruler of the soul. 
If thou seekest a heart as soft as the fur of the fox, give thy body to hardship like musk. 
Oh thou, who hast no garment better than sackcloth, authority comes not from silk and brocade. 
The beauty of the gazelle is in the roughness of its skin; therefore it is chosen to carry messages of love.
Musk remains in rough parchment and escapes from silk. 
If thou art sugar, be content with compression ; if thou art a pearl, be content with a hard shell. 
Sometimes be like a ruby dawn, ending the night; sometimes, like the dawn, be the target of sighs. 
Endure the burden of distress in the pitch dark night; the greater the distress, the greater the favour. 
Those faithful ones who reached their destination, reached it along the path of affliction. 
The gift of calamity is the happiness of the prophets, and that which gives thee happiness is calamity. 
The wound of calamity is the remedy of selfishness ; the bitterness of wine is the essence of its sweetness. 
The dragons are the guardians of treasures, and discomfort guards the treasure of ease.
Be a cypress and be free from thy fetters. Be a candle and be happy in consuming thyself.
Toil is the remedy of complaint, and beyond every toil there is rest. 
Providence will not bring trouble upon thee, unless it takes other troubles from thee. 
On the journey -which leads to freedom, the guardian grief is the fore-runner of happiness.  The story of the dog, the hunter, and the fox 
There was a hunter who had wonderfully sharp sight. He travelled far and wide in the desert. 
He had such a courageous dog that, when it ran, it outpaced the sun.
The rhinoceros went in terror of its strength; the wild ass, of its devouring teeth. 
On his travels, it was his companion and friend ; it would work for him night and day. 
Love burnt in his heart for it; it was his guardian by night and provided his daily bread. 
That lion-dog was lost to the brave man; the man feared that the dog had been destroyed. 
He said : In this perilous journey, the price of a dog’s foot is a lion’s head. 
Although this grief broke his heart, yet he bore it with patience. 
He was patient beyond bearing; each grain of his patience earned him a dram of profit. 
A fox came to him from a distance, mocking him, and said : Do not be patient, oh impatient one ;
 I hear that swift runner is dead. May your life be long, though the dog has disappeared. 
 Last night when he left you to hunt, he ran swiftly and vanished. 
 This which the dog caught for thee to-day, must suffice thee for two months, oh brave man. 
 Arise and make roast meat of thy heart, eat the kernel and give the husk to the poor. 
 Formerly thou hadst rich food ; now thou wilt no longer eat fat foxes. 
Thou art now without the fat of our limbs , thy nature is free from our bile.
 Thou art separated from him ; what fidelity is this? Thou dost not grieve; what love is this?  
The hunter said to the fox :  The night is still pregnant; this one day’s grief is mine. 
I rejoice that in this narrow house neither happiness nor sorrow will last. 
 All this mastery and servitude exist in this revolving sphere. 
 The stars and the heavens revolve; ease and toil will pass away. 
 I am happy that my heart is grieved, since grief is the cause of happiness.
 My wolf suffered the fate of Joseph. I am " not a wolf ; I will not rend my garment. 
 If they have taken it from me, oh deceitful one, they will bring it back with a prey like thee. 
He was still speaking when dust arose, and the dog appeared through the veil of dust. It came and ran round and round him; it caught hold of the fur of the fox with its teeth.
The dog said :  Excuse me that I came late; the fox knows that I came like a lion. 
 My return enhanced thy faith; the helplessness of the fox is an assurance to thee.’ 
His affairs will end happily who is drawn by assurance to the divine purpose. 
Seek the path of assurance in everything; nothing is more blessed than this stage of the road. 
The foot becomes the head on the path of assurance ; the stone becomes gold in the eye of assurance. 
If thy footsteps are firm in assurance, thou wilt get dust from the sea and moisture from fire. 
He who united assurance to trust, wrote on generosity :  God will give sustenance. 
He was no fly on another man’s food; he accepted wdiatever came to him. 
Thy sustenance will not be taken from thee; do the work of God and be not anxious for thy daily bread. 
Go to His door, because He is better than they. Ask thy sustenance of Him, because He gives thy daily bread. 
No one of us who begged at that door, returned empty-handed. 
Those who have assurance, are a different race ;. we are the feet, and they are the head. 
When they spread their prayer carpet on the water, they change the pure wine into honey. 
Since life is not assured to thee for a day, why shouldst thou lay in a provision for a hundred years? 
When they created us, they apportioned our daily bread to us in eternity.
Since they have sent thee thy daily bread from thence, thou consumest here only thy portion. 
Although many have striven in this world, whoever ate more than his portion ? 
Strive to excel in faith, because this is thy covenant; sustenance and wealth are not increased by effort. 
It requires thy effort and God’s grace to make thee more precious than the whole world.
The effort of Nezami was not strenuous; divine favour prospered him.
Oh thou, who on earth are beloved like the heaven, thy lovers are both earth and heaven. 
Thy work, since thou hadst knowledge, was greater than thou couldst imagine. 
At the beginning, thou didst not take milk but sugar from that nurse who brought thee up. 
Thou shouldst have greater beauty. What beauty is greater than this? 
Because of the brush which they used, they have made of thee a beautiful picture. 
They have tied the cord of life to thy heart, and they have girt thy waist with the jewel of the body. 
It is better for thee to be weak, because in this meadow a fat gazelle cannot keep pace with a lean one. The living creatures which are thy slaves, are the birds in thy snare.
Since thou art a Phoenix, be the glory of the work; eat little, say little, and harm none. 
Whatever thou mayest see in creation, is working in this workshop. 
The owl which is known as the bird of ill-omen, is the nightingale of the treasure of the ruin. 
Whatever exists on this curtain, is worthy of a body and has a value for its life. 
Though they have fewer gems from thy sea than thou, like thee they are the jewels of this world. 
When thou bringest into account the idea of _less and more, expect to pay damage according to the injury.
The good and the evil in this world are for thy use ; in good and in evil they hold up a mirror to thee. 
If thou shouldst give shoes, they will give thee a hat. If thou exposest the secrets of others, they will expose thy secrets as does the moon. 
Arise, do not, like the dawn, divulge the secrets of others, so that the keeper of thy secrets may be like the night. 
The veil of the bee is the petal of the rose, and thine is this lace curtain of heaven. 
How long wilt thou fly for food like a fly into this spider’s web?
The veiled ones who own the world, hid thy secret behind the curtain. 
Thou didst come out from behind that curtain, therefore thy secrets were unveiled.
Do not even bid farewell to the heart which is outside the veil; lend no ear to that which is not behind the veil. 
The actor who is behind this curtain, did not tie this veil on thy head without reason. 
Do not hold to anything but this curtain. Do not play any melody except this tune. 
Listen to this melody and awake; be entrusted with the mysteries behind the veil. 
Thou couldst make thy body purer than the soul, if thou wouldst imprison it for forty days. 
Man is honoured by imprisonment; for this reason Joseph lay in prison. 
One cannot find the value of the heart and the dignity of the soul except by discipline. 
Entrust the silver of nature to discipline; produce the gold of nature by discipline, 
So that through discipline thou mayest reach a state where thou wilt be drawn from humiliation to glory. 
When thou hast broken in the wild horse of nature, the coin of sincerity will be minted in thy name.
When reason and nature become thy friends, the story of the ironsmith and the perfumer is true. 
One will blister thy face with heat, and one will perfume thee with the scent of ambergris. 
The baggage of nature holds no salvation. In the cage of the bird there is little life. 
That which is contrary to habit, is the leader of the caravan of happiness.To turn away from lust is sovereignty; to abandon it altogether is prophetic power. 
If for an instant desire is under thy control, then bring the shoes, because paradise is thine. 
Jangle the bells of lust; be the servant of faith, not the hireling of the devil. 
Fly for safety to the sanctuary of religion, that thou mayest be free of care on the day of resurrection. 
The perfume of the Prophet is the guardian of Bu Taleb from the raging fire of hell. 
Truly, the benevolence of the blessed is the protecting armour of the saints.  The story of Feridun and the gazelle 
One day, Feridun went out sight-seeing with some of his friends. 
When he arrived at the hunting ground, he saw a little gazelle which attracted him. 
Its neck and its ears disarmed enmity; its eyes and its buttocks interceded for it.
Attracting the king’s eye, it seemed as though it had sprung from the king’s vision. 
The king was so much attracted to that quarry, that he was completely enslaved by it. 
In the pursuit, his horse became as hot as his heart; he made the arch of his bow as soft as the belly of the gazelle. 
Notwithstanding his efforts, the arrow missed it; even at that pace the horse did not reach its dust.
Feridan said to his arrow :  Where is thy revengeful feather ? ’ ’ and to his horse : Where is thy swift gallop?  
 Ye are not this time what ye both were before ; ye are small compared with that little grass-eater. 
The arrow spoke : Oh Lord, this poor wretch is the object of thy gaze. 
It runs under the protection of thy armour; who can strike upon thy armour with an arrow? 
It is not fitting that the object of the gaze of the great should be touched except by the hand of the minstrel. 
Seek the brand of the great, oh wise man, that thou mayest be great through their brand. 
Service is the attribute of humanity; to serve is the glory of mankind.
In the eyes of the spiritually minded, there is no service more acceptable than fidelity. 
Lay the hand of faithfulness on the girdle of fidelity; strive not to break faith. 
The serpent guarding the treasure is not poor; yet it is but a girdle from head to tail. 
Heaven is the crown of the head, because the whole of it is a girdle for service. 
Whoso holds the reins of virtue, is girt for the road of service. 
The candle which became the ruler of light gamed this lordship through the service of the bee. 
Arise, oh Nezami, because thou hast not girded thy loins. What effort hast thou made to serve?
Before the forerunners of existence had drunk water from the sea of munificence, 
There was no right or left hand on this kingdom. There was no dust on the road of this earth. 
The promise of delay had not come to its end. No manifestation had come out from behind the curtain. 
Night and day had no sign of humility; the soul and the body were not combined for existence. 
The elements still struggled together; the laws of balance were not yet manifest. 
The grace of generosity showed benevolence and let one drop fall from its sea.
By that one drop, this blue heaven immediately began to revolve. 
They raised dust from the running water; they produced thine essence from that accident. 
When thou arisest from this work-shop, it will be as dust arising from the road. 
How beautiful was that moment when thou wast not; thy picture was unpainted, and thy soul existed without thee ! 
The eye of heaven was free from this search ; the ear of the earth was free from these discussions. 
So long as thou didst not tread this road, existence was full of gratitude to non-existence. 
Night and day were free from the trouble of thy pregnancy. Vegetation was unfertile, and nature was mature.
The garden of the world was not troubled by the thorn; the earth did not suffer disturbing dust. 
The fortune of the Gemini who had girded their loins, was free from the opening of thy vein. 
When the moon was eclipsed, it was not disgraced in the earth by the beating of thy tray. 
Venus had not yet been dishonoured on this clay, and the pinions of the angel Harut had not yet been shed in Babylon. 
Earth and heaven were without thee. Thou wast absent, but the care for thee existed. 
When the decree of the universe was renewed through thee, the turquoise dome resounded with thy fame. 
The star did not escape thy evil eye. The pageantry of the cradle of the stars was broken. 
The month and the year were without movement, until thou knewest their secret. 
The face of the world which was a clear mirror, was darkened by these breaths. 
Thou tookest the torch of dawn to the evening and didst call it false and true. 
May the dust of the earth be in tbe mouth of heaven, because it has girt its loins in thy service. 
In heaven they call thee the fruit of the soul. Listen, because these are spoken words. 
Alas, that thy crown is better than thy head, the covering better than the dog, the nosebag better than the ass. 
There was much boasting in this world, that the world is not worth to thee so much as a grain of barley on the dust of the road.  
Thou wouldst exchange a soul for a handful of dust; thou givest a whole world for a particle of clay. 
Oh thou, by whom the face of the earth is troubled, it is better that like a treasure thy place should be under the earth. 
The oil of thy brain which is like quicksilver, is frozen by this world. 
So that it may not confine thee as in a hazel nut, abandon this world. 
Day and night are not ermine and sable; this dappled stoat is really a dragon. 
Thou art not a cat; do not stretch out thy hand. Do not dally with the worthless fickle woman. 
The lion has slavered on this road; why dost thou bend down thy head to the water like a stag? 
If heaven shows thee water, do not be deceived ; it is a mirage. 
Do not gallop swiftly, thinking thou hast seen the water of heaven. Drink the water of thy mouth, because what thou hast seen is only salt. 
Make a plan, that thou mayest not'be thirsty. 
Be like tabashir, which is obtained by burning the tabashir canes. 
So long as thy Joseph was out of the pit, his gaze was on divine Egypt. 
Thou earnest from the blue heaven with yellow cheeks, when thou didst fall into this pit. 
The vinegar of thy eyebrow was not a remedy -for all thy bile and for thy yellow face. 
Since thy fat had grown for a hundred years, —-how could it be cured by the vinegar of thy eyebrow, which is but ten years old?
Thou hast seen the blood of thy father on these seven battlefields. Do not dishonour thyself for these seven loaves. 
Thou art setting fire to thine own harvest; thou art striking blows at thine own fortune. 
Gallop and urge on thy steed, because the arena is thine. Give orders, because the command is thine. 
During these few days of life in which thou holdest the cup, eat well, sleep well, and rest well. 
Truly, it was an act of great tyranny to set thee free from that rope so lightly. 
Thy feet are fettered, and thy back is bent; yet thou art still frying in thine own fat;
Therefore thou art here the fuel of the kitchen fire; on the day of resurrection thou wilt be the brushwood burnt in hell. 
Even supposing that this belly of thine is full of water and of bread, oh fool, thou wilt then be worth no more. 
If a man could lengthen his life through eating more, then he who eats most would live longest. 
Life is (short, therefore it is precious. The value of life lies in its brevity. 
Eat little and see what great ease thou wilt have; eat much and see the great discomfort. 
What has thy reason to do with thy food? Only thy greed sets thee to this work. 
Thy greed is impatient to do mischief. Abandon this fool who deceives the intelligent. 
As opposed to thy greed, they have given thee reason, that thou mayest not eat what is not given thee. I fear that this work to which greed puts thee, will turn thee to its own colour. 
Every good and every evil in this world receives colour from the other.
A fruitseller who lived in Yaman, had a small fox to guard his goods. 
It kept good watch on the road and guarded the warehouse of the greengrocer. 
A thief played many tricks, but none of his arts availed here.
To hurry matters he closed his eyes. He slept and by sleeping induced the fox to sleep. 
When the fox saw that the wolf was asleep, sleep overcame it, and it laid down its head. 
The thief saw in that sleep his opportunity to take the purse; he came and plundered it. 
He who sleeps on this road, loses either his head or his hat. 
Arise Nezami; it is not the time to sleep; it is the time to say farewell to all.
Oh thou, who art more precious than the night of union, whose shadow is lighter than the dawn, 
How long wilt thou sit in sorrow like a shadow ? Arise, for a banner is better when it is raised. 
When kings intend to start on a journey, they send their baggage on before them.
If thou art a, king, resolve to start on the road; prepare for a better journey. 
Send thy baggage on before thee; send on thy provision for to-morrow now. 
Because of the prudence of the bee, its hive is full of honey. 
The ants which manfully draw up in line, carry provisions for the morrow. 
The heedless man, unless he is blind, is not below that bee and this ant. 
He who wishes to enjoy worldly comfort, should lay in provision in summer for the winter. 
Except thee and me, all who obey this instinct, are dealers in jewels of an hour.
No man’s spirit thinks of the future; no man’s vision sees more than the moment. 
Our abode which is higher than the heavens, is the abode of foresight. 
No matter how and where I search, no one has greater foresight than we. 
Though the pleasures of the moment are sweeter than life, they are less sweet than the pleasures of foresight. 
We who know the secrets of the heart, are jewellers, though we are made of clay. 
We have a sign of what is to come, and we know the past. 
We have read carefully from this table of clay the minute subtleties of the lesson of the nine spheres. 
No one bears our brand; we weip the first fruits of this garden. On that day, when they sifted thy dust, they compounded it for the elixir of the heart. 
With great pain and trouble thy dust is mixed; in the heart of this dust there are many treasures. 
Eecognise the due value of this dust; worship^ the dust, oh ungrateful one. 
From thy coming and going to this place, learn the road to thine own abode. 
What is the purpose of thy coming on this journey? What is the wisdom of returning thence? 
In the beginning, when this empire did not bear thy name, and this ruined village was not thine abode,
Thou didst possess the glory of the angelic Phoenix ; thou flewest in the zenith of heaven. 
Though the power of the wing of thy love had no hounds, the eternal way, too, had no limit. 
Thou wast weary and earnest to this earth ; thou threwest thy shadow onto this clay; 
And again, when thou art tired of this prison, thou wilt tread on the skirt of the sun. 
Though thou mayest leave all behind thee, thou wilt still go forward. 
Thy work is only to progress; thou wilt not settle on one line. 
In the time of generosity, thou art generous; thou art new and old in existence. 
Leave this mother who kills her children; heed what the father has said to thee. 
Look to thy father, oh simple minded man ; hold to his traditions and see what he did. 
One cannot expect ease and comfort, because it is not obtainable in this life. 
If one moment of life were according to one’s heart’s desires, one’s wasted life could return again. 
Grieve and pass on. Art thou made from other clay? What reason hast thou for happiness? 
Be content, it is not to me or to thee that Providence said: Be happy.’’ 
We were created for toil and for profitless discourse. 
On my life ! We do not deem the give and take of the world to be real. 
Why is thy face red like wine because of thy coming? Since all who come must depart.
How long will there be this compulsory arrival and departure? 
It cannot be doubted that non-existence is nothingness; the doubt is in existence which is also nothingness. 
Do not fly swiftly, since thou earnest slowly; do not go quickly, because thou earnest with difficulty. 
A time will come when the trumpet will sound ; they will stamp our die on a new coin. 
They will refresh the drooping rose; they will bring together that which was scattered. 
Oh thou, who art not ashamed of to-day, at least be ashamed of that other day.
For all these troubles which lie before us, for this patience of our wounded hearts, 
Religion is our only remedy and the only steed for this desert.  See the difficulties of the road and do not lag behind; do not waver, oh enduring soul. 
Hold the mirror of effort up before thee; look in it and protect thy face. 
Repent, and God will forgive; do not enter submissive only to the divine power.
A religious man was atti’acted to evil; he chose the street of the wine sellers. 
He put wine to his lips and wept bitterly, saying :  Oh wretch that I am, what is my remedy? 
 The bird of desire has rested in my heart , it made the beads of my rosary into a snare. 
 Mecca was the thief of my time; my original home was the wine tavern. 
 My star was evil, and I suffered misfortune ; I was destined for the street of the wine-drinkers. 
 The eyes of modesty are hidden through my fault. Wine is drunk in the streets of the wine-sellers through my fault. 
 May the world be delivered from me, the forsaken one; may my dust be far from my skirt. 
If it were not fate, wdiy should I be an idolater? How could a pious man frequent taverns?  
Since he was looked on favourably by the spiritually minded, a youth who was in that circle, said : 
 Keep fate out of this affair; to Providence a hundred thousand like thee are not worth a barley-corn. 
 Come to the door of repentance and wash away thy sin; then speak in this way. 
When thou goest, they receive thee, forgiving thy sins; otherwise they will come themselves and take thee captive. 
It is enough, give up grazing on the grass of the earth; heaven should be thy green sugar-cane. 
That sleep may not overcome thee, avoid it. Make a little provision for the time of non-existence. 
It is unfitting that the eyes should weep blood for the same sleep in life and death.
When religion saw thee in this deep sleep, she hid her face behind the veil. 
Arise Nezami, because the king has mounted. Why art thou fettered here at midnight?
Oh heaven, how much longer wilt thou revolve so slowly? Oh earth, how much longer wilt thou endure this tyranny contentedly? 
After each night comes the dawn; the end of every burden is to be unloaded. 
Fear is cast into the spheres of the earth. 
The hour of the earthquake is a supreme thing. 
The madness of the raging earth broke the link of the chain of heaven. 
The wind broke up the distracted earth; the mad earth will break the chain. 
With whom did the earth make a wager to loosen the girdle of heaven? 
The night lost its colour and the dawn its perfume Heaven ceased to be a polo-stick, and earth escaped from being a ball.  
The earth knocks at the door of the high heaven, and the girded heaven lies in ambush.
The cataclysm of heaven emerged from the ambush and disintegrated the earth limb by limb. 
The old heaven will rend its robe and will break —the string of the clay bead. 
Heaven will come down and will unbend; the earth will go swinging up. 
Both heaven and earth will be freed from our troubles; our dust will be cleansed from both roads. 
The heavens will cease to work for thee; the earth will be immune from thy guile. 
The stars and the sky were ashamed. How much longer should they worship a handful of dust? 
The round heaven is like a serpent; in the end the serpent will eat dust. 
Oh ye, who have grieved the earth, which of you is outside this earth? 
Why is the dust in this vessel of grief? Why is the colour of its vessel the blue of mourning? 
If ye cannot lie in ambush and throw out this — clay from this vessel, 
Wash your skirt clean seven times with the water and dust of this smoking vessel. 
The robe of the stars was lifted from the heavens; the line of destruction was drawn on the world. 
A sudden disaster will fall upon the earth from the swiftly revolving heaven.
The signs which portend upheaval, are shown by the agitation of the heavens.
The head jerks when it is broken; this jerk is in this world to-day. 
This black oyster is thine enemy; its eyes are foil of pearls, hut its heart full of whales. 
This is not the pearl of the sea, and this is not the jewel of the mine of vision. 
He who saw it was saddened and lost his sight like a dragon looking at an emerald; 
Therefore he has no eyesight; he has a thousand eyes but no sight. 
Thou hast not chosen the road of non-existence, because thou hast seen it with the eyes of others. 
Use thine own feet; one cannot walk with the feet of others. 
Even though Bahram is lifted up as high as heaven by gold and power, his portion is the grave. 
One cannot close the door of this road; one cannot raise the head above this roof.
Remain in this prison which has its doors and shutters closed, as if thou wert stricken with typhus. 
How long wilt thou discuss and remember heaven? May the humble dust be upon its proud head. 
Do not be grieved by the sky and its milky way; do not consider the straw carrier worth a barleycorn. 
Soar above this revolving dome, that thou mayest be free from the circle of the narrow compass. 
Imagination which is the thinnest thread, has turned back ashamed from this narrow road. 
See the helplessness of shame-faced imagination; look carefully at this narrow road. On this tight-rope do not cling to a hair; otherwise come thou out like a hair from the dough. 
Since thou mayest obtain better profit than this, it would be unwise to stay here. r
Since this heap of dust is unfaithful, it is not wise to turn to it.
Every crown is a sign of humiliation; every belt is stained with a hundred slaveries. 
Every merit bears the ridicule of a city. In every sweetmeat is the sting of poison.
The fire of dawn in this kitchen is half a spark from the flames of hell. 
The moon whose body is the candle of heaven, gets its oil from begging at the door of the sum 
The cloud which gives life to that which is withered, is itself the humour of depression. 
The ship knows what great loss w T ater, which is the ease of life, can bring. 
This world is a house full of faults; thou dost not look at its defects. 
Thou art blind to thine own faults and hast become a mirror for the faults of others. 
Do not show faults like a mirror, that thou mayest not be dimmed by a breath. 
Either cast out merit by thine absence ; or break the mirror of thine own fault. 
Close thine eyes to the faults of others; look at thine own picture and find the faults there. 
There is virtue and vice in everything; do not look for faults, and thou wilt find merit.
Can one not see at night by lamp light? Can one see the crow only in the light of the day? 
How can it be fitting to find fault with the feet of the peacock, when it has golden feathers?
The crow whose body is all black, has white eyes; look and thou wilt see.
The feet of Christ, walking on the earth, passed across a small market place. 
He saw a wolf dog which had fallen by the cross roads; its life had gone out of its body. 
A crowd like carrion-eating vultures was gazing at that carcass. 
One said :  The fear of this brings darkness to the mind, as breath blows out the lamp. 
Another said :  That is not all; it blinds the eyes and oppresses the heart. 
Everyone sang on this note and made cruel allusions to the carcass. 
When the turn of Jesus came to speak, he discarded faults and found virtue. 
He said :  The picture remaining of its body shows that pearls are not so white as its teeth. 
And the others, through fear and hope, whitened their teeth with that burnt oyster shell. 
Do not seek the faults of others and thine own merit; turn thine eyes down to thyself. 
On the day when thou takest the mirror into thine own hand, be modest; do not worship thyself. Do not adorn thyself like the spring, that time may not destroy thee. 
The garment of thy faults is woven very thin, therefore they have put thee behind nine curtains. 
What is in this ring which, if thou wilt look at it closely, is not a badge of servitude?
If thou art not a, dog, do not wear even the collar of the Pleiades. If thou art not an ass, do not carry even the load of the Messiah. 
What is heaven but an old widow? What is earth but a rotten fruit? 
The whole world from its beginning to its end, is not worth a grain of barley, because it is transient. 
Do not grieve for the world, oh master; arise, if thou grievest, pour out the wine of happiness for Nezami.
Arise and roll up the carpet of the heaven, because there is no fidelity on this chequered backgammon board. 
Do not seek the picture of thy heart’s desire in its union. Do not expect fair play, when it doubles its throw. 
Why put one’s foot in this sea? Why lay one’s load on these waves? 
The falcon said to the duck :  The country is beautiful. It answered, saying :  Thank you, I am quite comfortable here. 
Oh thou, who art in this ship of sorrow, thy merchandise is the cause of thy destruction.
Throw thy burden overboard, because it cumbers thee ; it will not give thee bread, unless it drowns thee. 
There is no treasure of safety in this dustbin; there is no marrow of fidelity in this bone. 
This world gives thee no grain of favour; dissolve thy partnership with it. 
The provision in this tent is but a dirty bowl and an empty table. 
Whoso looked at it, his mouth was sealed. Whoso spoke to it, his tongue was burnt. 
There is naught in this litter but the sound of many bells. There is naught in this bowl, but there are many flies. 
He who dipped his finger into this bowl, made of his skull the ring on his finger. 
It is not right that in this village there should be perpetually distracted thought and troubled sleep. 
Retreat into the house of non-existence; leave this ruined village. 
Set the window of this house on fire. What gain is there in selling thy house to this old woman? 
Why hast thou embraced this world? Thou hast not brought it forth from thy womb. 
Draw thy pen across this world and live in happiness. Remove thyself and live peacefully far from it. 
Thy road is long and thy halting place far away; prepare baggage and provision for thy journey, 
Especially in this desert, full of demons, a hell which kills the heated and devours the thirsty. The blood of the heart is the spring of its water of life; the sun is its salt. 
Its salt is the wine of the saltless; the evil ' eyes yearn for it. 
There is no water, and through this salt which looks like water, the courage of the heart is destroyed, and the heart of courage bleeds. 
What will be the portion of the caravan of the senses on a road, at whose sight the heart bleeds?
In the heart of this desert, haunted by demons, the house of the heart is small, and the grief of the heart is great. 
He who was content in this wilderness of the world’s desires, was saddened like the heart and burst like the gall bladder. 
What use is there in this clay from hell? Arise and exchange hell for paradise. 
To reduce this earthly form to dust, fate will tread thee down continually. 
In the end, as is its wont, it will pass thee from hand to hand, until thou art lost. 
Since we must return to the dust, why pass over this earth? 
Do not trample anyone under thy foot, because fate has trampled many such as thee under its feet. 
None has lived in this world for ever; none has possessed this decree of eternal life.
Do not tread on this thorn; arise, protect thyself from this thorn.
That impermanent abode of thine is a place of fear; why remain in a place of fear ?
This world is transitory, do not deem it eternal; it is an autumn wind, do not think it the breeze of spring.  The story of the spiritually minded magian priest 
A Magian from the empire of India walked to a flower garden. 
He saw a resort like a beautiful picture; he found a kingdom decorated with unreality. 
The rose bud, like heaven, ha d girt its loins for bloodshed; the short-lived tulip was unaware of itself. 
In the meadow grew flowers of many colours. Much wine had been mixed with sugar. 
The rose, like a shield, was wounded by its own arrow; the willow tree trembled for fear of its own life. 
The tresses of the violet were the chain on its own neck; the eyes of the narcissus were the silver coins in its lap. 
The tulip had ground gems and the rose turquoises, the tulip which lasts for one breath and the rose for one day. 
Their respite was not for more than an instant; yet none thought of the future. 
The sage passed through that beautiful garden, and after some months he again passed that way.- 
Instead of those roses and nightingales which he had seen in the garden, he heard only the cries of kites and crows. 
Hell had displaced paradise; the Csesar of that palace had removed to a hovel.
The verdure had rotted; the bouquets of roses had become heaps of thorns.
The sage contemplated that scene intently; he laughed at all and wept for himself. 
He said :  Though it has a time of outward appearance, nothing is meant to be permanent. 
 The end of all things, produced by dust and water, is destruction. 
 There is no better street than the street of destruction; there is no other way for me than the way of destruction. 
When the vision of grace increased his sight, he knew himself and knew God. 
He became the jeweller of the gem of that secret, until at his death he returned to essence. 
Oh thou, w r ho art a Mosalman and not yet as good as a Magian, thou art a spring and hast not a drop of water. 
Be not less than that Magian of India; abandon the world and say to it : Be not. 
How long wilt thou hold up thy head impertinently like the rose and pride thyself on thy crown and thy belt? 
Rise and unloose the belt of clay, because the world has girt its loins for thy blood. 
The crown and the belt are the calamities of love, pledge them both to the tavern of love. 
Sometimes thy crown makes thee the master of the earth ; sometimes thy belt gives thee the servitude of the heart. 
Strive to free thyself from this duality of master and servant; or, like Nezami, free thyself from thyself.
Rise and say farewell to the world; release thy skirt from this snare.
Prepare a better kingdom than this; open a better shop than this. 
When thy heart and eye finish their journey, they should groan and shed tears, 
So that, by moistening this clay, thou mayest boast of mastery over thine own heart. 
If thou art a camel, dance on the journey; otherwise do not throw wine-skins under the feet of elephants.
Since thou hast none whom thou canst trust, only non-existence can be thy confidant. 
The boon companions and friends have gone on; with whom art thou sitting, since thy friends have gone ? 
Although thy poetic talent may attract thee with subtle imagery, how can it alone be a companion to thee? 
It is better that a pious heart should seek the light of purity in this black dust. 
Before the stage of disruption is reached on the road, discard thy possessions. 
Cast away thy baggage, because thou movest slowly, so that, having a light burden, thou mayest quickly reach thy destination. 
Come to heaven, if thou seekest the Heart. 
What couldst thou gain in this house?Since thou art entangled in this snare, tear it, that thou mayest escape onto the road, 
Because this circle which is like a Mim, will —not let thee out, unless it is broken in half. 
Do not be the butt of this chequered dome ; do not obey the orders of this circle. 
If thou art free from the orders of day and night, thou wilt be outside the circle of this world. 
Until thou canst make thy footsteps firm, do not step forward in search of any work. 
Prepare a way of escape from any work, before thou enterest on it. 
It is wise to look at the road, so that one may avoid falling into a pit. 
Make a,n opening in this house of deluge, that thou mayest have opportunity to escape. 
A cunning fox scented a dog; he made two exits to his earth, 
But was unaware that the smoke of this deceitful heaven would close the exits.
What is this happiness which pleases thee? Thou art unaware that thou art ignorant of thyself. 
It was destined that thou shouldst arrive in and depart from this world in sorrow.
If now thou breakest the divine covenant, how can thy soul be relieved of its burden of responsibility? 
Walk in the way that the soul has shown thee ; throw away both worlds, because thou hast seen the world.  
Do not look down, that thou mayest not fear the depth; do not look back, that thou mayest not fear the shadow. 
Take a provision of religion, because there are few habitations on the road ; bring the water of thy tears, because the road is waterless. 
Give the pure pearl into the custody of the oyster shell. Free thyself and set thy dust free. 
The revolving heaven has killed many a friend such as thee; it has slain many more powerful than thee. 
Make a supreme effort in this duel, so that some time thou mayest throw it to the ground. 
There is no need to fear the shield and sword of him who is not skilled in this art. 
Do not call it a snake, because this twisted rope is naught against the attraction of thy love. 
How can one grieve for this glass which can be broken by the wind? 
The generous ones who have extinguished the fire of gold, have conquered their enemies by a sweetmeat.
So long as thou canst, through thine enlightened heart, like the sun, kill thine enemy with a rose.
Two philosophers, belonging to the same school, contended unbecomingly. 
They boasted proudly and lacked humility. The empire was the empire of unity; in it was no place for duality. 
There cannot be truth on both sides; one is acceptable. There cannot be two chiefs; one will be destroyed. Who ever saw two swords in one scabbard? 
It was the desire of the learned men that the school should belong to one only. 
When jealousy girt its loins for revenge, the school rejoiced at the loss. 
Both played a melody by night. To clear the school, they cried, saying,
That each should lay aside enmity and drink the draught the other had prepared, 
To see which of the two had more courage in this affair, and whose poison was the deadlier, 
So that they should give the empire of two philosophies to one art and the life of two forms to one body. 
The first contestant made poison, so virulent, that it could melt black stone. 
He gave it to the other, saying: This is a life-giving wine; do not deem it to be poison, because it is better than sugar. 
The brave man took his draught; he drank the poison as if it were sweet sherbet. 
He made an antidote from herbs and drank it. He closed the path of the poison by an antidote. 
He burnt like a moth and recovered his wings. Like a candle, he hastened back to the assembly. 
He cut a rose from the rose garden; he made incantations and breathed them onto the rose. 
To overcome his enemy, he gave him that rose which was more effective than the poison.‘ 
The enemy was overcome by fear, and he died from the rose which that magician gave him. 
The one neutralised the poison in his body by remedies. The other died from one rose because of baseless fears. 
Every coloured rose in the garden of the earth is a drop of blood from the heart of mankind. 
Know the garden of the world, whose spring time thou art, to be a house of grief, in which thou art a picture. 
Throw stones at these layers of earth; throw dust on this mirage. 
Pass on from this water and its thoughts; soar above this dust and its ruins. 
Do not study the secrets of the sun and the moon; destroy the sun and the moon like an eclipse,
Because this golden moon which is in this pavilion, is the demon on the road of Abraham’s love.
The day made thy morn to burn thy heart; heaven changed that day of thine to this day. 
If thou hast a heart shining like the sun, one day thou wilt reach that day from this. 
Shed tears, that by the rose-water of hope thou mayest wash this chequered tablet clean, 
So that thine actions may ensure peace and the weight in thy scale be heavy on the day of resurrection. 
Religion which strengthens thine arm, will straighten the balance of thy scale. 
No noble man of virtue, caring for religion, ever grieved for this world.Since thy desire is for this world, leave religion to Nezami, and take thou this world.
Look at the age of the world and its miserliness, that thou mayest not be deceived by its youthful appearance.
In the hand of this aged one who looks young, thou seest a bunch of roses, and it is fire. 
The spring is a mirage, do not be deceived by it. This Qebleh is a cross, do not worship it. 
Thy portion is not even a thorn from all these roses. If they all exist, thou art not. 
When thou art cut off from all thy desires, thou wilt take away from this house only what thou didst bring into it.
When they carry their baggage on the sea of the day of resurrection, the poor will reach safety. 
No matter whether thou wilt save thy capital or lose it, they will take away that which they have given thee. 
T his world is a, market place, because it gives one thing and instantly takes away another. 
Although one is a silkworm, the other is a moth. 
Make a candle of thy gold, that like a lamp thou mayest gain by thine own wick. 
Destroy thy body and sa,y to the nine orifices :  Be not. Cast away thy gold and say to pure gold :  Be not. 
Put the foot of thy generosity on gold, not thy hand, that they may not call thee a worshipper of gold like a rose.
That gold which is not minted to one's own desire, is only arsenic. 
If thou lovest gold for its colour, the tail of the peacock also has that colour. 
The kings who take away gold by means of steel, are more blacksmiths than kings.
Though the will of Aaron made of it a crown, it sank into a well because of that mistake. 
It is thy load so long as it is on thy head; it becomes thy steed, when thou treadest it under thy feet. 
If to give gold is to give life, not to take it is better than that gift. 
To take it gives thee greed of the world; to spend it gives thee ease of life. 
Is it not better not to take it, than to take it and spend it? 
When thou storest gold, it is like rich food which gives thee bile; if thou spendest it, it is like a fruit which takes away bile. 
Gold which is mined in the East, is called western by the ignorant.
The West and its people are the enemies of generosity; the East and its people are enlightened by generosity. 
Whatever the eastern morning gives, the western night borrows. 
Gold is the ruler of the life of all mines; the feather is the power of the wings of all birds.  
Though that Roman gold which, in the balance of love, is true by the stone of Damascus
And is shining and beautiful, throw dust on it, because it is deceitful.
Whose hat has this thief not carried? And who has not been misled by the wiles of this demon? 
A pilgrim started on his pilgrimage; he practised the customs of the pilgrims.
All that he had above his requirements, amounted to one purse of dinars. 
He said :  My heart tells me that a certain noble Sufi who has renounced the world, 
Is a religious man; if others are untrustworthy, he is to be trusted.
He went out and brought him in secretly to his own house and entrusted him with his purse of dinars. 
He said :  Guard this secretly; then bring it back to me when I return. 
The Haji started on his way to the desert; the old man took away the gold which was entrusted to him. 
Oh Lord, I take refuge in thee! How long was it that the heart of the poor man yearned for that gold? 
He said :  I will straighten out my affairs with the gold; I have found the treasure which I required. 
 I will use it up quickly, that I may not be tied to that which God gives so secretly. 
He untied the knot of that string and enjoyed happiness for some nights. 
He spent on bis belly all that gold with which he was entrusted, and he -worshipped his belly. 
He laid his hand on that casket of dinars; he made the tresses of the beauties rings on his girdle. 
He tore the pious robe of the Sufi; all that was left to him was grief and many excuses. 
He ate the prey, till not even a sign of it was left, and not even tallow remained for his lamp. 
When our pilgrim returned from his journey, he paid an unexpected visit to the dishonest man.
He said :  Oh sage, bring it to me. He answered: What? He said: The gold. The Sufi replied : Be silent, 
 Be generous, and do not dispute. Who can take revenue from a, ruined village? 
The purse was spent on lust and desire; there is a great distance between a poor man and a purse. 
 No one has carried off booty from a Turk; no man has ever entrusted his belongings to a rogue. 
 Your gold broke the pillar of my heart, and I was broken by the dust which settled upon me. 
With a hundred smiles he spent the money; with a hundred tears he stood before him. 
He said:  Be generous, because we repent; we were infidels and have become Mosalmans. 
 Nature is pregnant with vice ; if there is vice, the fault is mine. 
Until the generosity of God said to him sternly : 
Arise, because the dervish is standing, arise. When the owner of the silver turned to God, he was generous and let the matter drop. 
He said to himself :  Do not be hard on him; he has nothing. What can I take from nothing? 
 What can I take from him who has not a grain of barley and has no pledge other than pleas for forgiveness ? 
 That which remains to the Sufi of that property, is a round Mim and a Kufic Alef.
He said : If thou dost not wish me to ill-treat thee, and that I should make lawful to thee that wdiich is unlawful,
Oh thou, who art as deceitful as the heaven, do not have a short sleeve and a, long hand. 
There is no heart which is free from greed and envy; none is to be trusted on this earth. 
Religion is good money, do not entrust it to the devil; do not give the royal armlet to the keeper of dogs. 
If thou shouldst give it, oh master, the loss is thine; none can take back capital from the poor. 
This is a stage of error, take virtue as thy provision. Lay hold on the skirts of religion and retire. 
Heaven does not rob the poor; it robs the caravans of the rich. 
Since the guardian of this road is a robber, poverty is better than wealth. 
By experience, I found that the bee stings him who desires the honey. 
The flesh of the lion is bitter, so that after its death it may not be eaten by wild animals.
The candle burns out through standing upright. The moon wanes through seeking perfection. 
The wind which is both at war and at peace with the dust, is safe on this road through its poverty. 
Does the seagull know that the calamity of the fish is its silver?
When gold is the scale of thy need, it becomes the opening chapter of thy five prayers. 
Thou wilt not be free from the road of this need, until like Nezami thy life is pure.
Oh thou, who art entirely happy, eating fodder like a donkey and a cow, 
Inattentive to this centre round which the sun revolves, negligent of this circle of lapis lazuli, 
The matter is for the enlightened ones. What grief have the enlightened for the world? 
Come to thy work. Why art thou sleeping? Do the work which has been allotted to thee. 
Why art thou in a drunken sleep? They are in ambush ; the experienced do not act thus. 
See this mound of grief, look forward, observe carefully, and see thine own incapacity. 
Thy reason is forgetful like an old man; that he may remember thee, remind him. 
If thou hadst not the honour of reason, who would call upon thy name? Who would worship thee?  
Reason is Messiah, do not rebel against it. If thou art not an ass, do not lead the ass into the mire.
Either get thy light from the path of reason, or keep thy skirt far from its door. 
Do not intoxicate the reason which educates. 
Do not make the eagle a bait for the sparrow. 
The hostility of thy reason made the wine which is lawful everywhere, unlawful.
What is wine that thy honour should be in its bowl? Reason is that spring which they call wine. 
Although wine takes away the grief of the world, oh master, do not take that which takes away reason. 
Wine is salt mixed with the heart, poured upon the heart of the saltless ones.
If thou didst desire advice, do not take that which makes thee unmindful of all things. 
How ignorant is the man who tastes that which draws the line of oblivion across him. 
Blind the eye of vain thoughts; fetter the foot of drunkenness. 
Oh thou, who, like an Alef, art in love with thine own stature, thou lovest the gloom of thine own melancholy. 
If thou art an Alef, be a bird without wings; otherwise be like ba, a letter with a drooping head.
When thou art, like an Alef, the ornament of the assembly, thou hast nothing and art poor like an Alef. 
Thou art not a thorn, that thou desirest height; it is better for thee to be humble like the rose.
Thou art not a child, do not play games. Thou art not life, do not aspire to length.
The day has come to an end, and the sun has set. The darkness grows, as the light decreases.
I have heard that, when the day draws towards evening, the shadows become twice as long. 
Why dost thou, like a garden, worship shade? He the destroyer of darkness, like the light of a lamp. 
If thou canst remove thy shadow, thy faults will become invisible like thy shadow. 
Not everyone can sit in darkness; only the spring of the water of life is in darkness. 
Oh thou, whose head and feet are upside down thy judgment is in confusion. 
Dawn gives thee the golden bowl, that thou mayest cleanse thyself from thyself. 
When thou washest thy garments in this basin, draw thy water from the source of the sun.
Nature has kindled such a fire in thee, that no water remained in the heart of thy life. 
If thy body is not cleansed from the stain of selfishness, yet gold which is not all red is still gold.
If we say all creation is pure, how then should the belly of hell be filled?
A man gets the armour of truthfulness from fire alone.
Falsehood will lead thee to need and poverty; thou wilt free thyself from all sorrows, if thou art truthful.'
If, like the scales, thou art true, entrust the truth of thy heart to the balance.
Every barley-corn and every grain which thy hand takes out of thy measure and thy scales, 
Is each one in its own place, and on the day of retribution they will be brought forward. 
They will disclose thy secret; they will show thy short measure and thine overcharges. 
Do not thyself hold the balance ; if thou boldest it, give more and take less. 
The rose embraced the thorn from its crookedness ; the sugar cane got its sweetness from its uprightness. 
Where truth raises its banner, the help of God clasps it by the hand.  The story of the tyrannical king and the truthful man 
There was a king who .tyrannised over his subjects, and he had the art of Hajjaj in his inquisitions. 
Whatever the night brought forth from the day, was known to him in the morning. 
One morning, someone went to the king, disclosing more secrets than the sun and the moon. 
He had stored up games of the night from the moon, and had learned airs and graces from the dawn. 
He said : A certain old man secretly called tliee a murderer, a tyrant, and a shedder of blood. 
The king was enraged at these words and said : r< I will kill him instantly.
He spread the sheet of leather and strewed sand upon it. Demons would fly before his insanity. 
A youth went, swiftly as "the wind, to the old man and said :  The king has accused thee of a crime. 
The old man made his ablutions, put on a shroud, went to the king, and began to speak. 
The cunning king wrung his hands and turned away his face in malice. 
He said :  I hear that thou hast spoken, calling me revengeful and a murderer. 
 Thou art aware of my wise rule. Why dost thou call me a tyrannical demon?  
The old man replied : I am not asleep; I have called thee worse things than this. 
 Youth and age are endangered by thy actions ; towns and villages are afflicted by thy intrigues. 
 I who have thus recounted thy faults, bear the mirror reflecting thy virtues and vices. 
 Since the mirror shows thy picture correctly, break thyself; it is an error to break the mirror. 
 See that I speak truly and heed me; if it be not so, kill me on the scaffold. 
When the sage admitted the truth, his veracity affected the heart of the king. 
When the king recognised his superiority in truth, he realised the sage’s rectitude and his own falsehood. 
He said :  Take away the funeral herbs and the shroud; dress him in our robe of honour and perfume him with ambergris.  
He turned away from tyranny, practised justice and the care of his subjects.
None ever hid his own veracity, and no one suffered loss on account of truth. 
Be truthful, that thou ruayest gain salvation; if thou art truthful, God will give thee victory. 
If true words are all pearls, they are indeed bitter, because  Truth is bitter. 
When thy words are true, God is thy helper. 
The nature and the heart of Nezami are both true, and because of this truth, his affairs are in order.
Each moment, the clever actor behind this curtain shows a strange scene on the curtain. 
The minstrels are seated on the carpet, but there is none to dance. The sea is full of pearls, but there is no diver.
Silver, wealth, a crown, or a sword, are not grudged to thee, if thou dost not grudge them to thyself. 
Even though thou wert equal to the angel Gabriel, fate is not niggardly; neither is divine power miserly. 
However much thou takest, there is still more to take. His profits are greater than thine expenditure. 
Travel on this road and note thy progress. Knock on this door and understand the mysteries. 
Its stones are rubies, and its herbs are the philosopher’s stone. If thou dost not realise this, the fault is thine.
Here the controlling hand and the pen are "Broken, because such great treasure is behind this curtain. 
Each moment a fruit comes from this garden; each is more beautiful than the preceding one. 
In this treasury are many heart strings; each necklace is more beautiful than the other. 
Each group of the travellers who walk one behind the other, is wiser than the preceding one. 
Reason honours only reality; reason sets no store on age and youth.
It is said that, when a stone grows old, it becomes a ruby. Opinions differ on this point. 
These people grow worse with age. In them there is nothing but noise, like an echo in the mountains. 
Thy milk is an unwholesome poison to him who has seen thee suckling in infancy.
Justice is wanting in old age; the old do not wish well to the young.
A fresh rose gives great happiness. It is the old thorn which wounds. 
Collyrium is made from unripe grape. A serpent becomes a dragon in old age.
An old brain cannot receive reason which inhabits the skull.
He who compiles the tables of the stars, does not make his predictions from an old almanack. 
The old dogs who eat like lions, tear out the bowels of the gazelles wolfishly. 
If I fear the old wolves, look upon my beauty and blame me not. The old wound lightly, their wound is pleasant. What can I do with the nature of youth, which is fire? 
Although youth is all wisdom, does it not also possess a strain of madness? 
Some grey-haired men who lay claim to youth, claim to be black, when they are white. 
I who scatter treasure like a rose , claim old age in youth. 
The old are possessed by self-love. Enmity to self is friendship with God.
Call that new moon which thou sawest as a crescent, a full moon, when it is perfect. 
When the palm tree grows tall, stretch thy hand far that it may reach the dates. 
When the grain which is thrown into a corner, grows to an ear of corn, call it a grain no longer. 
See that, when a pond becomes a lake from the water of the stream, thou dost not look upon it with the same eyes. 
The sun looked with a different eye upon the night which entirely closed its eyes to the dawn. 
A deadly enemy who is wise, is better than a foolish friend. 
Do not look upon the sugar cane merely as vegetation; see how sweet it is. 
Give thy heart to merit not to a boastful man ; surrender to merit wherever it may be. 
Though the. oyster shell has much water, a pearl is produced by one drop of rain. 
Much trouble of heart and soul is needed to procure a royal pearl.
Thy protection should sound its bugle for every banner which providence raises anew. 
They have not yet ruined this village; nor have they yet rolled up this carpet. 
Do not censure creation; beware, lest thou shouldst suffer the scourge like Satan. 
Providence compels him to rebel who did not submit to its commands. 
The story of the young prince and his old enemies 
I heard a story that in far-off Marv there was a young prince, like a cypress.
He was troubled on account of the nobles of his country. The country loved him as did fortune. 
The aged were fighting his youth. He was in peril from that approaching danger. 
One night he fell asleep full of anxiety on account of that rebellion. In that condition he saw T at sage in a dream, who said to him : 
 Oh new moon, destroy the old tower ; oh fresh rose, cut off the old branch, 
That the empire may be confirmed to thee and thy life become more pleasant than thy nature. 
When the king aw r oke from his deep sleep, he destroyed those persons. 
He built up anew and destroyed the old. The empire was confirmed anew to that young king. 
The destroyer of the empire should be humbled. A treacherous army is better dispersed. 
The new branch will not grow from the trunk of the cypress, unless the old branch is cut off. Unless the water is diverted from the stream, the plane tree will not unfold its leaves. 
Unless the passage to the spring be clear, water will not be born from the heart and the eye of the clay. 
With thee, but outside thee, is one who feeds thy heart. He gives good counsel to thine ears. 
Draw that sword from its scabbard for an instant. How long wilt thou keep it sheathed, oh thou, its enemy? 
That breath comes not from the casket of this dust. Thou dost not give that pure companion his due. 
Sacrifice everything to such a being and be wholly entitled to the name of generosity. 
The rich who attained to honour and wealth, found the eternal empire through generosity.
The seed of generosity gives sure harvest. When it ripens, it gives a provision for the day of judgment.  Oh God, give to Nezami pure gold from the treasure of thy generosity.
Oh thou, whose banner is raised by a breeze, and who lowerest it to that which is mere dust, 
There is no village, and thou claimest to be a villager. There is no empire, and thou claimest the throne of Solomon. 
Thou art not a sword. What are all these wounds? Thou art not a bell. What are these tinklings? 
Scatter silver like the edge of the sword. Rise, be empty like the inside of a drum. 
The devil draws thee to himself; thou hast not yet fallen. Do not give up the fight; thou art not dead but living. 
Do not surrender to a Magi an; do not claim courage, when thy sword is never drawn. 
The eloquent are worthy to read the proclamation of empire. The Messiah is the recipient of the sneeze of Adam.
He who, like a moth, possesses true love, will strike single-handed at the army of fire.
Dive for a short time and die. Throw down the beggar’s robe and receive an empire. 
By the living God, thy generosity which is a cloak for plunder, is not godly. 
Be a lion ; do not fear the kitchen cat. Be talc ; do not fear the fires of hell. 
If thou art depraved, hell fire is thy lawful portion. If thou art gold or a ruby, do not fear fire. 
How much more pride, oh rogue of the dustbin? How much more self-glorification, oh thou bag of bones? 
There have been others before us, who did not rest from seeking high position. 
See what profit was theirs from that glory. There was a profit, but since it was lost, what profit was it? 
If thou, a grain of dust, shouldst tread upon heaven in power and dignity like the sun and the moon, 
Even if thou shouldst surpass that circle, since thou art dust, thou wilt fall. So that thy head may not be cut off, as hair is. cut, beware, do not set foot on this pinnacle. 
Thou art not a bird, thou canst not fly. Unless thou strivest mightily, thou wilt not reach it. 
Attack heaven valorously, so that astonishingly it may fall at thy feet. 
Thou hast drunk wine, why blame the poison? Thou hast sinned, why blame fate? 
Do not rail at fate, oh good man; fate has done no ill to thee and to me.
Tate made great efforts and performed great wonders to improve us.
Since we are of no account in the world, why should we blame fate? 
Unless the ruby is lustrous, the king will not put the seal of acceptance upon it. 
Stones are plentiful in the world; those which turn to rubies are rare. 
The thorn and the jasmine are both vegetable growths. One is the thorn which damages sight; the other is collyrium. 
Colour and scent do not leave the true rose, even if it has no help from the water of the stream. 
Even if water could increase its benefits, how could it turn thorns and thistles into jasmine? 
If the scheme were not thus established, the laws of the world would hav.e been otherwise. 
The affair rests in the hands of God and is not affected by our designs. He gives empire and riches to whom he wills in this world. 
A man falls through lack of grace; those who are favoured, need have no fear in this world. 
The fortune of him who seeks the divine empire, is ever high. Be the servant of that empire, wherever it is to be found. 
This kingdom is bestowed by divine grace and not by worldly authority. They do not give an empire in jest. 
Hold to those who are spiritually rich, so that thou mayest not need to search vainly. 
Do not associate with the base ; be accepted and honoured by the world. 
Prosper with the good fortune of Orion. Break " the walnut and test thy fortune. 
Humble thyself, if thou seekest the empire. 
Tree thyself from the tangled affairs of this world. 
It is the pure water which is welcome. Aloe wood is burnt, because it is knotted. 
Follow the Heart; give thy heart to none. Thine own body is load enough on thy way. 
How long wilt thou lay thy hand on another hough, saying : Oh, that I had greater riches? ’’ 
Even if thou couldst grasp the whole world, since thou must leave it, why seek it? 
Renounce greed, because it is the robber on the road of devotion. Contentment will kill thy greed. 
The centre of this turquoise-coloured dome is open to thee and closed to imagination. 
Either do not fear, grasp it; or vanquish it with one thought.There is no knowledge left in the clay of' humanity, no spirituality left in the whole world. 
In the two picture books of these nine scribes,, there is no figure which has reality. 
Do not seek the friendship of the enemy of reality; do not seek the water of life in the mouth of a dragon. 
A wise enemy who is the grief of one’s soul, is better than a foolish friend. 
The child of a nobleman went out with some others of his own age.
As he was running, he fell down; his happiness was destroyed, and his backbone was broken. 
The distress of his companions was greater than the calamity which had befallen him. 
He who was his best friend, said :  We must hide him in the bottom of a well, 
So that the secret may not be as manifest as the sun, and that we should not be ashamed before his father.
The wisest child among them w T as his enemy. 
He said :  Surely the matter will not be kept a secret by this company. 
 Since they consider me to be his enemy, they will lay the blame for this misfortune upon me. 
He went to his father and informed him of the accident, so that the father put the matter right. 
He who possesses the jewel of wisdom, is able to do all things. 
Who can unloose the knot of fortune? He who can trample upon it. 
Since Nezami has passed beyond the possessions of this world, his work has surpassed high heaven.  
Oh thou, who neglectest God and thyself, remaining in the grief of thy soul and the toil of thy body,
Be silent; the movements of the boasting spirit which is in this world, reach only to the lips. 
Do not embrace the world like the arch of heaven; do not bind thyself to what is not thine. 
The power of the world is greater than the power of thine arm; its weights are too heavy for thy scales.
Do not expect the strength of a mountain from a speck of dust. Do not expect to boil a cauldron on one spark.
Every loin which is girt with the belt of contentment, is freed for ever from the service of the body.
The harvest of greed is disappointment; the crown of contentment is on the head of submission. 
In this defile, there are many pickpockets; he whose purse is emptiest, is most at ease. 
If thou art wealthy, submit to anxiety; otherwise go, hang on the skirts of poverty. 
There was a beardless man who grieved at his condition. He saw two men fighting and pulling each other’s beards.
He said :  Though my face is hairless like a tongue, I am glad to be safe from those who pull beards. 
They have deemed it advisable to take away thine ass and thy load,
So that, like Jesus, thou mayest reach the door of the Heart, and arrive at thy destination without an ass and without a load.
If thou art a believer, do not ponder on fire- worship. Strive for refinement, do not be uncouth. 
This is a wave of destruction, go with less speed.- Throw thy burden into the water, and save thy soul. 
It is better for thee to be pithless and ruined, that thou mayest float on the water like a gourd. 
There is value in eating little and sleeping little. The treasure of greatness is in destruction. 
Thou art not a lover of carrion like a kite; be a crow, do not dip thy feet in blood. 
If thy body is bloodless like a picture, thou wilt be saved from being eaten by vultures. 
Know that blood is a heart turned to wine, a fire turned to water by shame. 
That thou mayest break the power of blood, thou wilt suffer the stab of the lancet, even if thou art iron. 
Do not suddenly give up the habit of eating; save by eating less.
The lion is proud, because it eats little. It is the nature of fire to consume much. 
Since the day was satisfied with one loaf, it became the light of the eye of the wise. 
When the night drank its morning draught too early, the excess of its blood turned it black. 
Excess of food lessens reason. It makes the heart which is like sweet herbs, into the target of grief. 
Thy reason is a soul, and thou art its body. Thy soul is a treasure, and thou art its talisman. 
How can this treasure give thee light, until thou breakest the talisman of its door? 
Dust is known to be untrustworthy. Say Let there be no association with the untrustworthy. 
The dust will not grieve for thee, were it to bring the whole of thy life to an end in grief; do not' grieve. 
Someone said to a negro :  Oh father, why this laughter? One should weep at such blackness as thine?  
He answered: As I have no hope in this world, it is better to have a black face and to laugh. 
It is not strange to find happiness in a black face, because a black cloud gives out lightning.
Since thou hast no desire for this prison, be lightning and laugh at the whole world.
The laughter of the parrot lessens the sweetness of sugar. Loud laughter closes the mouth of the partridge. 
It is better to weep than to open the mouth in untimely laughter.
To burn and to laugh like lightning, shortens life like a flame. 
What is this laughter without joy like a candle ? One should weep much at this laughter.'
Bite thy lip in laughter, that thou mayest not laugh immoderately.
To weep much is not good for the eyes; too much laughter is not becoming. 
There must be a due proportion of good and evil in the old and the young. 
Rise, grieve and be happy. Sometimes one and sometimes the other is fitting. 
There is a sorrowful cry in a happy heart. Within the jet of the night, there is the jewel of the day. 
No one has indulged in his lusts without afterwards receiving a blow. 
Every load of baggage has its own bell; every sweetmeat has its own fly. 
Providence is thy wise nurse; leave thy good and evil to her care.
If she gives thee vinegar, do not ferment like syrup. She desires thy good. What knowest thou? Be silent. 
The serious traveller on this road must make constant effort. It needs a Moses to be the travelling companion of the Prophet Khezr. 
Thou must serve the great to reach greatness. 
In time of need, the helpful friend is he who withdraws the snare, not he who drags one down to calamity.  The story of a sage and his disciples 
A traveller, one of the spiritual guides, was on a journey ; with him were a thousand disciples.  
The sage in that desert broke wind loudly and gave it as a trust to the trustees of the dust. 
Every one of them left him, until they had all departed but one. 
The sage said to bun :  What happened, that they all departed, and thou didst remain?  
The disciple said :  Oh thou, who livest in my heart, the crown of my head is the dust of the sole of thy feet. 
 I did not come by a wind at first, that the same wind should blow me back. 
He who expects a gift, will go when he has received it. He who comes by a wind, will go by a wind.
Dust travels quickly and settles quickly, therefore it cannot establish itself in one place.
The mountain comes slowly into being, therefore it is so firm.
The way of the world is to divulge secrets. The work of patience is to bear burdens. 
Bear the load of piety, if thou art not lustful. Do not bear the burden of nature, if thou art not an ass. 
So long as the proclamation of thy piety was not untrue, thine eyes wept on account of it, but it was not stained. 
Piety in the gold-embroidered robe of the king is the story of the basket and Solomon. 
The candle which scatters gold every night, is an ascetic hidden under a cloak. 
Piety is a stranger in the wine tavern. Treasure is precious in a ruined place.  
The piety of Nezami, which is a beautiful garment, shelters under the banner embroidered with gold.
Some counterfeiters met together and made a new counterfeit die. 
Know their outward appearance to be tin like the inside. Guard thy words from them.
To thy face they are more agreeable than the daylight; behind thy back they are more deceitful than darkness, 
Smoother than a candle, knottier than aloe- wood; smooth in outward appearance, but cunning in reality. 
They are unjust and uncharitable; they find fault, and they complain. 
They have learnt of love merely from the lips of others; they have stored up revenge heap upon heap. 
They are eager, but more withered than a heart; they are alive, but as dead as their own hearts. 
Do not test their friendship on the touchstone of thy heart. Thou art not drunk, do not put thy foot in this mire. 
They echo like the mountain; do not tell them thy secrets. If thou desirest secrecy, do not give them voice. 
They boast that they may gain thine affection ; they strive to gain from thee. 
Since that friendship is due to their need, may the curse of God be on such amity. 
Any speech which has a selfish object, is friendship which incites to enmity, 
Friendship which is based on division, is not friendship but enmity. 
What will a friend call thy poison? A sweetmeat. What will a friend call thy faults? Virtues.
A friend is a healing salve. If he is not, cease to associate with the unworthy. 
It is a, cat which eats its own kittens from love of its own kind. 
Who is a friend? He who keeps secrets. All these divulge secrets like time. 
They all plan how they can surpass thee, and by what schemes they may lessen the value of thy coin. 
Outwardly their reins are tied to thee; in the time of necessity they necessarily depart. 
If the appearance of a friendship is denied by thy heart, it is enmity. 
How can the body know who is thy friend? The heart knows who is faithful. 
Thou hast one heart and a thousand heartaches, one withered rose and a thousand wounds from thorns. 
There are a thousand kingdoms but only one Fereidun. There is much ambergris, but only few enjoy it. 
Everything in this world divulges secrets. Only thy heart is the confidant of thy secrets. 
If thy heart does not lock up that secret, how canst thou expect it to be kept in the hearts of others?  
If thy heart is not transparent, and this is wrong, why is thy secret like a sun in the desert?
If thy heart does not tell thy secret by its transparency, why does a glass show the wine it holds? 
Since friendship is a necessity, do not withhold thy secret from thy friend. 
Since thou hast set foot on this empire, strive to gain a partner. 
Unless thou knowest the soul of thy friend, do not waste the jewel of thine own secrets.  The story of Jamshid and his household 
One of the household of Jamshid was the keeper of his secrets. Their relation was closer than that of the moon and the sun.
The fortunes of that young man rose to such a height, that the king honoured him above all the world. 
Since he surpassed others in faithfulness, the king entrusted his treasure to his heart. 
Notwithstanding his great intimacy with the king, that youth sought to go far from him, as an arrow flies from the bow. 
The secret of the king wore down the soul of the young man. He was unable to tell that secret to anyone. 
An old woman found her way to that young man and saw that his red tulips were like her yellow roses. 
She said :  Oh cypress, what wind of autumn has blown on thee, thou who drinkest w r ater from the stream of the king?
Why art thou pale? Thou art not treated with cruelty. What is the cause of thy grief in this fortune ?
 Why is the colour of age on thy youthful cheek? Why are thy wild tulips like a dandelion? 
 Since thou keepest the secrets of the king of the world, be happy like the heart of the king. 
 The subjects prosper through their kings, especially the leaders of the army. 
The young man said :  Thou speakest ignorantly of this matter. Thou knowest not what is in my heart. 
Patience has given me pain as my companion ; patience has turned my face so pale. 
 The king has placed in my heart, consonantly with his majesty, the jewel of his secrets. 
 That which he has entrusted to my heart, is great; I cannot divulge the secrets of the great. 
 My heart is not locked on his words, as it would be on lesser matters;
 Therefore I do not laugh with thee, lest the bird of the secret might fly from my tongue. 
 I keep this secret in my heart. I give it my heart and my heart bleeds, 
And if I divulge the secret of the king, fortune will grieve for me.
The old woman said : Do not mention any name. Keep thy secret to be thine only companion. 
 Do not deem anyone to be the confidant of this secret. Do not even consider thine own shadow as thy confidant. 
It is better to have this golden-yellow face than that it should be reddened in blood. 
Every night I hear the head constantly beseeching the tongue to beware. 
If thou desirest life, hold thy tongue. Thou art not the sun, do not disclose secrets. 
A man who holds his tongue, is happy. It is tire mad dog whose tongue hangs out. 
It is for thine own good to be tongue-tied. It is better that a sword should be sheathed. 
This counsel gives ease to life : The tongue is the plague of life. 
That they may not scent thee out, as they would the violet, and cut thy throat on account of thy tongue, 
Guard thy tongue in this world, that thy head may not cry  Alas!  in the basin. 
Do not open thy mouth, though there be much pleasure in it, because there are many ears behind the wall.
Do not listen to evil, but be deaf; do not speak evil, but be dumb. 
How long wilt thou write? Slow down thy pen. They will write against thee ; keep thy mouth shut. 
Wash away what thou hearest as with water. Be a mirror, do not say what thou seest. 
The devotees do not relate in the day what they see in the night, oh how strange! 
Therefore this starry dome will not tell by day what it sees by night. 
If thou hast been instructed behind this veil, do not repeat by day what thou hast seen by night. 
In the heart of the night, which is the secret repository of treasures, are the treasures of many hearts. 
The swift enlightened travellers pass by that which they see. 
He who surpasses high heaven, carries off the ball from the arena of the heart. 
The eye and the tongue which love outward appearances, are as the hair of the head and the skin of the body. 
Love, when secret, is a miracle ; when manifest, it leads one to the wine taverns. 
They have made this knot with the cord of faith. They have carded its cotton by religion. 
The bud which made its soul the veil of this secret, is a fountain of blood, when it opens its mouth. 
How can the mouth attain to this dignity? 
The story of the Heart must be told by the tongue of the Heart; when it comes to the tongue, it is fire. 
This food is wholesome in the bowl of the Heart; when it comes to the tongue, it is fire. 
This dumbness is thine eloquence. Thy haste is to go slowly. 
The enlightenment of the heart informs him who leaves speech to others. 
Only the tongue of the Heart can translate the language of the Heart, which is its idiom. 
If thou ownest the happy heart of Nezami, the whole of the empire of contentment is thine. NINETEENTH DISCOURSE On welcoming the next world 
See the private assembly adorned, shining, and beautiful like a full moon, 
Candles burning, and sweetmeats plentiful, the throne set up, and ambergris prepared. 
The world is the enemy of thy life; withdraw thyself from its friendship. 
See whom it has drawn to itself with chains. Whoso observed it, reproached it. 
The guardians of the divine court cry aloud against thee who art worldly and hast abandoned religion, 
Saying :  Turn back from the door of the tyrants and approach the tabernacle of this mystery. 
Thou art burnt by the heat of this desert; they will not hide what thou, hast hidden. 
The revengeful dog was spiteful. Was it for this that the fox grew fur?
This dark desert is a hell of burning sulphur; how happy is he who passes through it quickly. 
Collect the water of thy mouth politely; spit it out at the fire of this spring of sulphur. 
Give back this loan from heaven; give up this earth-born dust. 
Skilfully throw all away, that thou mayest own nothing and be free. 
He who walks proudly on this road, robs me and thee.  
The enmity of a scorpion is worse than that of a dragon, because one is hidden from thee, and the other is visible. 
The house is full of thieves, hide thy jewels. The desert is full of demons, tell thy beads.
The plunderers on the road of the heart rob near the halting place.
I fear that, when they attack thee by night, they will expel thee humbled from this desert. 
A small enemy is a great calamity; to neglect him is a grievous error. 
Do not fight half-heartedly with a small enemy ; thou wilt be shattered, if thou art not sharp-sighted. 
The ant blinds the lion cub, notwithstanding its insignificance and its lack of power. 
The caravan of captives reached its destination; the loaded ship reached the shore.
Hide thyself like a sleep, that they may not see thee. Flow like water, that they may not drive thee. 
One should not set foot in this monastery; if thou enterest, thou must return. 
If thou wilt not go back, they will make thy heart bleed; they will leave thy rations outside this monastery. 
If it were not a merit to leave the earth, heaven would not travel night and day. 
Arise, that the demon may not tear thy collar. Take hold of the skirt of religion and take refuge in it. 
The laws of religion call thee, listen to them; nature is not thine, abandon it.  The laws of religion are like a breeze, receive them in thy soul. Nature is dust, abandon it to the world. 
The laws of religion have given sweet herbs into thy hands. Do not worship nature, worship only the laws of religion. 
Do not gallop to every door like a breeze. Do not touch the point of every thorn like the air. 
All these are like shadows, be thou like the light. If thou ownest everything, abandon all. 
This revolving heaven is a noose round thy neck ; take heed how thou freest thy head from this noose. 
If it explains its own condition to thee, or informs thee of its age, 
Thy cave is too narrow for its deep thoughts; thy life is naught to its duration. 
The end of thy speech is silence; the result of thy work is oblivion.
It is better that thou shouldst knock at the door of love, whilst thou livest in this world, 
Because these few moments of thy wretched life are not happy except only through such wine. 
The heavens have prepared no royal robe without taking away two lengths of cloth. 
This quarrelsome heretical world will write against thee with a sharp-pointed pen whatever thou doest. 
They will open the same door of kindness and tenderness to thee, as thou openest. 
If thine eyes are curtains of evil, they play the same game with thee behind this curtain.
Know thou well that those who have seen much good and evil, have not approved of evil. 
He who passed along the road, gave some indication. He who did evil gave some pledge. 
Whether thy outward appearance is good or bad, thy name will be that which thou takest with thee. 
The name of a thistle is thorn; he who sells ambergris is called ambergris. 
Be not worthless, that a.t the time of judgment thou mayest not be ashamed of thyself and before God. 
Curse this world which burns the heart; throw a stone at this glass full of blood. 
Stone this flaming player; draw the pen of abrogation through this word;
Conquer this fortress of tin; ride on this chequered pie-bald horse, 
That heaven, from the pulpit of the nine tabernacles, may read the proclamation of kingship in thy name.
Thy work is to lower the banner; mine is to raise it.
I am mankind and soar to angelic heights. I lay claim to that part of heaven. 
My worth is greater than my stature ; my circuit is beyond this circle. 
There is no water, but I rule the sea. I am not an owl, but I examine treasure. 
Like the heavens, I have my foot on the treasure, therefore my place is very high. The story of Harunor Rashid and the barber 
When Harun became Caliph, the Abbasid standard reached to the heavens. 
One night he turned his back on his wife and his face to the comfort of the bath. 
A barber who was shaving' his head, grieved him with every hair he cut, 
Saying : Oh thou, who art aware of my skill, choose me to-day for thy son-in-law. 
Proclaim the marriage contract; betroth thy daughter to me, thy humble servant.
The Caliph was somewhat annoyed; yet he exercised tolerance, 
Saying: The heat has inflamed his heart; he is struck with awe at my majesty. 
He has lost his senses, therefore he talks so foolishly; otherwise he would not make such demands on me.
Next day he tested him with greater care and found the same impress on the false coin. 
He tried him thus several times, but his behaviour did not change. 
When the affairs of the wretch darkened the mind of the Caliph, he took the story to the minister for his instruction, 
Saying : I have suffered this indignity from a mere barber; the solution of this mystery must come from thee. 
 He aspires to be my son-in-law. See what his impertinence impels him to do!• 
 He has a dagger in his mouth and a razor in his hand; it is unwise to entrust my head to two swords. 
Whenever like fate he comes to me, he throws stones at me and at my jewel. 
The minister said :  Thou art safe from his demands. Perhaps his foot is on a treasure. 
 When that simpleton comes to thee again, order him to step off from that place where he was standing at first. 
 If he still offends thee, strike off the head of this barber; otherwise dig under the place where he stood at first. 
The obedient prince submissively changed the places accordingly.
When the barber stepped off from his first place, the Caliph saw his cheeks change colour. 
He saw him dumb and speechless; his eyes and his tongue taught courtesy. 
So long as his feet stood on a treasure, he saw his face royal in the mirror. 
When he had no treasure under his feet, he was again himself, the barber. 
They dug quickly under where he had stood; they found treasure under his feet. 
He who stands on a treasure, reveals a treasure by his speech. 
The treasure of Nezami, which shatters the talisman, is a pure heart and an enlightened mind.
Why are we who have abandoned self, sitting lowly in this dust? 
Association with this dust has humbled thee ; the earth has made many such schemes. 
Life has gone by, and we are left far behind ; we are stages behind the caravan. 
These two angels are our captives, but because of our ill-fame, demons are our kindred.
We do our hot work coldly like a stoker. We are cold after heat like ashes. 
Where is the light of the heart and the enlightenment of the mind ? Where is the ease and comfort of the past?
The black morning of the day of resurrection has dawned. The banner of the dawn of life has vanished. 
The laughter of negligence has died on the lips ; the spirit of the desire of life is broken. 
See by what magic thou canst escape from the captivity of this earth. 
Ely from this deadly snare; acumen provides for such escapes. 
The wolf has stronger teeth than the fox; the fox escapes, because he is more intelligent. 
Strive to be faithful and not to worship thyself but to worship God. 
Be the dust of a faithful heart and the soil of justice which grows green herbs. 
Every merit, learnt from the heart, is sewn into the selvedge of the cloth of fidelity. 
If there is merit in man, it is a lost jewel, if thou dost not approve it. 
If thou approvest it, it will change; the source of its water will be doubled. 
Experienced men will cherish merit with their life, wherever they see it.
The dust of the world is purified only by merit, and this merit is not found in the world to-day. 
If merit raises its head, the unworthy will lay hold on it. 
They distress the soul of the meritorious, until they destroy his virtue. 
They consider discipline to be mere outward show; they attribute madness to meditation. 
Some base men have assumed the title of generosity; the worthless slaves call themselves faithful. 
They ridicule liberality, and they abuse eloquence. 
They draw the picture of fidelity on ice. They boast to the sun and the moon. 
If a word is a balm of comfort, it wounds the hearts of such people. 
If they drink sweetness from the lips of a man, they lay their diseased hands on his face. 
They will pour vinegar, sour as unripe grapes, on a warm heart, sweet as figs. 
The eyes of the people are blind to merit; they can only see defects and faults. The harvest of the sea is not all pearls. One merit is enough for one man. 
In the eyes of a blind man, the Tigris is but a drop of water. The leg of a locust is a great burden for an ant.
These who claim fame, seek faults; they have no merit, and they pity the virtuous. 
In this earth they are darker than the essence of the clay; they bring more bitterness to the heart than grief. 
If they reach the mind, they darken it like smoke ; if they reach a lamp, they are but a wind. 
See the state of the world and who are its leaders, and who are chosen for renown. 
These who dishonour their own cradle, break my heart as though it were their covenant. 
I am lik e the moon in heaven; I shall not be broken. If I wane, I shall increase. 
How can they cheat heaven in this game, even though they take endless pains? 
Like the companions of Noah, they are the ancient enemies of eloquence which is fresher than the garden of the soul. 
Wage war, oh standard of Khezr! Pray, oh sacred breath of Noah! 
My heart wishes them no ill; if it remembers them, may it be forgotten. 
My silence is a strong voice crying out against their limitless iniquity. 
When the casket holds one pearl, it is full of sound; when it is full it is silent.
When a cask is half empty, it makes a noise; but it is silent when it is full.
If thou art full of learning, be silent; abandon speech and be all ears. 
When the roses were in flower, the nightingale spoke to the falcon on the lawn of the garden,
Saying :  Thou art more silent than all other birds. How is it that thou hast won the game? Tell me the reason. 
 All thy life long, thou hast been silent and hast not opened thy lips to speak one fair word to any man. 
 Thy abode is the hand of Sanjar; thy food is the breast of the partridge. 
 Why should I who, in the twinkling of an eye, bring forth a hundred beautiful pearls from the invisible mine of my heart, 
 Search for worms for food? Why should my nest be among thorns?  
The falcon answered :  Be all ears; watch my silence and be silent. 
 I who have some little experience, do a hundred things and speak of none. 
 Go, because thou art distracted by the world ; thou does no action, and speak of a thousand. 
 To me who am all reality, this hunting ground gives the breast of the partridge and the hand of the king. 
Since thou hast so much to say, eat worms and sit on thorns; that is all. 
Where they read a proclamation in the name of Eereidun, who will listen to the sound of a drum? 
The dawn, heralded only by the crowing of a cock, is but a smile of pity. 
No neck is free from the noose of the silent heavens. 
Do not attempt the heights of sublime poetry, that thou may not be imprisoned in the city like Nezami. 
Oh scribe, may God bless thy morning. Since I have laid down my pen, take thou it up, 
Because this design surpasses high heaven. It makes my pen paint many-coloured pictures. 
I have made a dagger for the king, of all these diamonds which I have set, 
Because the iron of my sword was still in the stone, and the forge of my smithy was small. 
If the empire had been favourable to me, I should not have spent my life thus. 
I feel in my heart that I have committed a sin in blackening these pages. 
The product of a few nights of manifestation is found in this royal bridal chamber. 
Eat of this roast lamb ; why be satisfied with smoke? Burn up all the salted meat. 
Go further, but go slowly. If thou ponder, ponder deeply. 
Erase any word which lacks courtesy and eloquence, because this is my wish. 
Draw the pen through whatsoever raises its banner against knowledge, even though it were myself. 
If in it I have not done justice to speech, I would not have it sent from city to city. 
Eloquence has shackled me in this place, but all places are under my hand.
Providence said :  Thou art not earth, move on. How long wilt thou sit still like the earth? Move on. 
My virgin eloquence which is peerless, has no garment long enough to clothe herself. 
The short garments reach only to her knee; therefore she kneels. 
She should be garbed in silk brocade, that it may be fitting for her to stand upright. 
What do I gain in the eyes of old and young but a voice? 
The market was noisy, but there was no gold; I had the toil of the market place and nothing more. 
Ganjeh has imprisoned me; otherwise the treasury of Eraq would have been mine with ease. 
The whole world has cried out saying : Oh young man, where is Ganjeh, and who is Nezami?  
Praise be to God, that this book has reached its end; the greater part of life is over. 
Nezami has covered it with jewels from head to foo-t to beautify it. 
May his scattering of jewels be blessed to the king to whom this gem belongs.
The bird of the pen opened its wings on the paper and flew off with the book.
He bent his head and scattered pearls from his lips; he completed. 
Reckoning correctly, it was, in truth, the twenty- fourth of the First Rabi’. 
From the time of Hejrat to this time, five hundred and seventy-two years have passed.